I'm a Therapist and I Tried the Viral 17-Second Manifestation Technique-Here's How It Went

Can you change your life in 17 seconds?

By Julia Childs Heyl, MSW Published on May 28, 2025

Svetlana Repnitskaya / Getty Images

Table of Contents
What Is the 17-Second Manifestation Method?
The Experiment
How to Practice
Does It Work?
Should You Try It?

Manifestation is everywhere these days, seemingly becoming a catch-all solution for all issues. Looking for love? Manifest it. Need a career change? Manifest it. Struggling financially? There's a manifestation for that, too. With all this focus on how to manifest a new reality, it is natural to question if any of this actually works. If it is so easy to manifest whatever we want, then wouldn't we already have everything we want? 

The newest trend in manifestation is the 17-second manifestation method. This TikTok-approved approach to manifesting touts that any and all dreams can be attained with just 17 seconds a day.

So, skeptics keep reading. I'm a licensed therapist here to test out if this manifestation holds any weight. Read on to hear my experience. 

What Is the 17-Second Manifestation Method?

The 17-second manifestation method is the practice of visualizing a goal or dream for 17 seconds every day. The idea is that over time, this goal will become cemented in your mind until it becomes a reality.

While the original creator of the 17-second method isn't known, it is rooted in classic manifestation schools of thought, especially the law of attraction. The law of attraction essentially states that if you keep a positive mindset, visualize your goals, and speak as if what you want is already your reality, you can manifest whatever you want.1

Trying the 17-Second Manifestation Method

I'm not a manifestation novice. Though I don't necessarily think about it as manifestation per se, I am a firm believer in getting clear on your desires, visualizing what they would look like, and then taking action to make them happen.

Part of how I do this in my day-to-day life is through what I call "manifestation walks," which are when I go for long walks and daydream. Typically, these daydreams lead me to get deeply introspective and consider why I want what I want and the steps it will take to get there.

I must admit, I was quite skeptical of the 17-second manifestation method. How much can we change our lives in just 17 seconds a day? Despite my doubts, I buckled up and set out to test the method for a week.

Each morning that week started with me waking up, lying in bed, closing my eyes, and visualizing a certain desire coming to fruition. I also attached a positive affirmation. For example, I was struggling to find clarity in a major decision for my family. Despite my best efforts, I couldn't figure out my decision, and it was eating at me. I visualized having made up my mind, being at complete peace, and moving forward. I attached the mantra, "I can trust my gut," to the visualization. 

Days 1-3

For the first few days, my skepticism remained. I kept thinking about how 17 seconds a day couldn't be enough to solve anything. However, I noticed that I had a different perspective on my conundrum throughout the day.

Day 4

By day four, I noticed I felt much more at peace and could picture myself having made a decision. Throughout the day, I felt more logical whenever my dilemma came to mind. It felt natural, but I think this is the product of my strong visualization that all was figured out, coming to fruition. 

Days 5-7

Though I was disciplined in practicing this for a week, I casually kept up with the habit for a few days longer.

Day 9

By day nine, I had made a decision. It felt so natural, I initially didn't even connect it to the 17-second manifestation practice. 

The skeptic in me believes my result is due to a combination of intention, setting aside a designated time every day to focus on solving my dilemma, and perhaps my desensitizing to the discomfort of not having what I wanted over the week.

So, was my result solely due to those 17 seconds I spent every morning? I'm not entirely convinced, and to be honest, I thought about my manifestation a lot more than 17 seconds. But I am sure it helped. 

How to Practice the 17-Second Manifestation Method
Step 1: Choose a Specific Desire or Goal to Manifest

Mine was a specific desire - I wanted to make up my mind regarding a decision that would inevitably change my family's life. 

Step 2: Attach a Positive Affirmation

The positive affirmation came rather naturally. "I can trust my gut" became my go-to mantra. I didn't only use it during the 17-second manifestation. I also kept it in mind throughout my days.

Step 3: Focus on the Thought for 17 Seconds

During the morning, I specifically focused on the thought for 17 seconds. However, my mind returned to it plenty of times throughout the day. 

Step 4: Release the Thought and Maintain Alignment

Releasing the thought and maintaining alignment was a bit tricky. Since making up my mind was a strong desire I had, it was difficult to release the thought throughout the day. 

Does the 17-Second Manifestation Method Work?

My experience may sound all good and well, but you may be stuck on a very real question: does any of this actually work? I turned to licensed marriage and family therapist Kim Slipski for insight. "I do actually believe that the practice of manifestation itself can have some very real and very practical results, depending on how exactly you choose to exercise and define it," she shares.

She continued by explaining that there is no evidence that simply thinking and visualizing a desire will result in it turning into reality. Research backs this sentiment up-simply thinking something into fruition isn't likely and can result in unnecessary risky behavior that has negative consequences.1

Every time we create, repeat, or even engage more creatively with a vision of our future or a specific goal, we prime our minds to consider and look out for things that will help us achieve it.

- KIM SLIPSKI, LMFT

Turns out, part of what may make manifestation effective is that it changes our perspective. "Every time we create, repeat, or even engage more creatively with a vision of our future or a specific goal, we prime our minds to consider and look out for things that will help us achieve it," Slipski states.

As I reflect back on my success with the method, I realized my focus on picturing myself having made a decision helped me look out for factors that influenced my thought pattern and ultimately meet my vision of being content and at peace with a solid decision about my family's future. 

Should You Try It?

It depends on how you want to approach it. While many choose to focus their manifestation on a concrete goal, like buying a house, I chose to focus on something a bit more introspective. This was a move Slipski approved.

Explaining that many manifestation schools of thought focus on attaining material things with their goals, she feels this can ultimately be a disservice. "For example, 'manifesting' a partner often emphasizes a laundry list of qualities you want in someone, rather than the richness and depth of a connection," she shared.

Also, manifesting a goal doesn't necessarily change how you feel. Noting that often the pursuit of material gains is connected to feelings of inadequacy or financial insecurity, simply visualizing a desire won't automatically change your feelings. Above all, the process of developing goals, focusing on them, and following through is what can actually help us meet our goals. 

If you want a quick fix, then you may especially be drawn to this technique. Just keep in mind that results will vary. In my case, I dedicated 17 seconds every morning to my desire, but it was likely my time spent in therapy pursuing self-development, the ability to engage in deep introspection, and the energy I spent thinking about my desire throughout the day that helped me meet my goal. 

So, should you try it? It can't hurt. At the bare minimum, positive thoughts can help decrease symptoms of anxiety.2 But, be realistic, stay consistent, and remember that your goals and desires are worthy of hard work. Don't bypass the wisdom looking for a fast solution within just 17 seconds a day.

Can You Create the Life You Want Through Manifestation Meditation?
Read More:
LIVING WELL
MINDFULNESS AND MEDITATION
2 Sources

By Julia Childs Heyl, MSW
Julia Childs Heyl, MSW, is a clinical social worker and writer. As a writer, she focuses on mental health disparities and uses critical race theory as her preferred theoretical framework. In her clinical work, she specializes in treating people of color experiencing anxiety, depression, and trauma through depth therapy and EMDR (eye movement desensitization and reprocessing) trauma therapy.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback