CONDITIONS A-Z
Addiction
Alcohol Addiction
Drug Addiction
Nicotine Addiction
 Medically reviewed by John C. Umhau, MD, MPH, CPE Updated on July 23, 2024

An addiction is a disorder characterized by the compulsive use of a substance or activity that triggers our reward systems despite experiencing adverse consequences. A person's genes and environment influence this complex condition. Addiction is widely viewed as a brain disease due to how it impacts the brain's reward, pleasure, and self-control circuits.

In the past, addiction was thought to only encompass substance abuse, but the definition has been expanded to include activities like gambling as well as gaming, shopping. and exercise. It's also important to note that addiction is about the underlying neurology of the brain and not about the outward behaviors. With appropriate treatment, people with addictions can go on to live happy, healthy lives.

UNDERSTANDING ADDICTION
Can Tapering Off Alcohol Prevent Withdrawal?
What Does It Mean to Be Sober Curious?
Can Self-Improvement Feel Like Too Much of a Good Thing?
The Symptoms Used to Diagnose Substance Use Disorders
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Is addiction a disease?

Addiction is a treatable, chronic disease that affects the brain's reward, motivation, memory, and related circuitry. Once the brain's reward system has been impacted by the addictive substance or activity, it can trigger a behavioral and biological response that promotes repeated engagement in the addictive behavior despite harmful consequences.

Learn More: Why Addiction Is a Chronic Brain Disease
What causes addiction?

People engage in potentially addictive activities to feel pleasure, and over time, the reinforcing effect of these activities may change brain chemistry to create an unconscious drive to continue the behavior. Multiple factors influence this process, including genetics, diet, mental health, past traumas, pain, stress, and stage of life.1﻿

How can you break an addiction?

The first step in overcoming addiction is to desire change and avoid the people, places and things which promote the addiction. Support groups, mentors, and 12 step programs provide help, while counselors, recovery centers, and physicians provide expertise and medication to treat cravings and the effects of withdrawal. Eating healthy and getting exercise also play an important role in recovery.

Learn More: Strategies for Overcoming Addiction
Is addiction genetic?

A person's genetics account for about half of their risk for developing an addiction. The impact of genetics is influenced by an interaction between a person's environment, diet, and biology. Alcoholism, like other addictions, tends to run in families, and members of those families are at increased risk for developing alcoholism.

Learn More: The Role of Genetics in Alcoholism
KEY TERMS
Substance Use Disorder
Behavioral Addiction
Intervention
Comorbidity
Substance Use Disorder

Substance use disorders are psychiatric conditions that involve the compulsion to use a drug or alcohol despite the development of adverse consequences. A substance abuse disorder diagnosis can be categorized as mild, moderate, or severe, depending on the number of diagnostic symptoms or criteria a person exhibits.

What Are Substance Use Disorders?
Behavioral Addiction

A behavioral addiction occurs when a pleasurable activity changes the brain and drives a person to engage compulsively in the activity despite harmful consequences. People can become addicted to activities like gambling, gaming, shopping, pornography, and even exercise. In some cases, people can experience withdrawal when they stop the behavior.

What Are Behavioral Addictions?
Intervention

An intervention is one of several strategies used to persuade an addicted person to get help for their addiction. Interventions are an organized attempt by family members or friends to confront a loved one about how their addictive behavior has affected them. Although commonly used, data on their effectiveness is lacking.

How to Know if an Intervention Is Right for Your Loved One
Comorbidity

Comorbidity refers to the presence of more than one distinct condition in an individual. A common example is when someone with a mental illness also has a substance use disorder. Neither condition causes the other, and successful treatment will often address both conditions at the same time. Comorbidity is associated with worse health outcomes and complex clinical management.

When Addiction and Mental Health Issues Co-Occur
EXPLORE ADDICTION
Why Emotional Sobriety Is a Critical Part of Your Recovery Journey
What Does It Take to Get Sober? 3 People Share How They Coped
Understanding Enabler Behavior: Motivations, Signs, and Strategies for Change
Redefining Sobriety: The Rise of the California Sober Lifestyle
The 8 Best Online Psychiatry Services That Take Insurance, Tried and Tested
Understanding the Link Between Trauma and Substance Abuse
Understanding Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder and Its Impact on Mental Health
​​How to Talk to Your Partner About Their Alcohol Use
Substance Use vs. Substance Abuse: What Are the Differences?
What Does it Mean to Be Substance Dependent?
What to Expect at a Methadone Clinic
Addiction to Methamphetamines
'Just for Today' in Narcotics Anonymous (NA)
Signs of Cocaine Use and Intoxication
How Long Does It Take to Detox From Alcohol & Other Substances
What to Know About the Sober Living House
What Happens When You Stop Drinking Alcohol?
What to Know About Ibogaine Use
What Does the Term 'Alcoholic' Mean?
What Is a Soda Addiction?
Is Cannabidiol (CBD) Addictive?
How Is Sex Addiction Treated?
What Is Ketamine Addiction?
How to Stop Smoking Marijuana
What You Need to Know About Porn Addiction
How to Sober Up: What Actually Works?
What to Know About Adderall Addiction
Is Alcohol a Depressant?
What Is the CRAFT Approach to Substance Abuse Intervention?
Does Oxytocin Affect Your Mental Health?
An Overview of Mental Health Statistics 
What Is Precipitated Withdrawal?
Can You Be Addicted to a Person?
What Is a Dual Diagnosis?
What Is YouTube Addiction?
How to Stop Emotional Spending (aka Retail Therapy)
Can You Be Addicted to Dopamine?
12 Things Your Therapist Knows That You May Not
How Long Do Seroquel (Quetiapine) Withdrawal Symptoms Last?
What Does It Mean If You Are Craving Ice?
What to Know About Voyeuristic Disorder
The Best Motivational Interviewing Training Programs
What to Know about Masturbation Addiction
The Comedown, Crash, or Rebound Effect of Drugs
What Is Pyromania?
What Is Addiction?
An Overview of Behavioral Addiction
How to Know If You Have an Internet Addiction and What to Do About It
What Is a Shopping Addiction?
Caffeine Addiction Symptoms and Withdrawal
The Stress of Constantly Checking Your Phone
An Overview of Substance Use
Caffeine, Stress and Your Health
What Makes Someone an Adrenaline Junkie?
Problem Gambling and Gambling Addiction
How Emotional Pain Affects Your Body
Self-Help Groups for Shopping Addiction
The Difference Between Impulsive and Compulsive Shopping
What Is Video Game Addiction?
Exercise Addiction Is More Harmful Than We Think-Here Are the Risks
10 Basic Netiquette Rules
The Symptoms and Risks of Television Addiction
What to Know About Peer Pressure
More In Conditions A-Z
Neurodivergence
Phobias
Anxiety
Kids' Mental Health
ADHD
Eating Disorders
Bipolar Disorder
BPD
Depression
Neurological Disorders
PTSD
OCD
Panic Disorder
Schizophrenia
Page Sources