What Is Antisocial Personality Disorder (ASPD)?
By Kendra Cherry, MSEd Updated on September 27, 2022
 Medically reviewed by Akeem Marsh, MD

frankreporter / Getty Images

Table of Contents
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Causes
Treatments
Coping

Antisocial personality disorder (ASPD) is a condition characterized by a lack of empathy and regard for other people.

People with antisocial personality disorder have little or no regard for right or wrong. They antagonize and often act insensitively or in an unfeeling manner. Individuals with this disorder may lie, engage in aggressive or violent behavior, and participate in criminal activity.

Psychopathy is associated with antisocial personality disorder. However, research has shown that not every person with ASPD is a psychopath.1 Approximately one-third of people with antisocial personality disorder meet the criteria for psychopathy.2

Introduction to the DSM Personality Disorders
Symptoms of Antisocial Personality Disorder

There are a number of defining symptoms of antisocial personality disorder. People with ASPD:

May begin displaying symptoms during childhood; such behaviors may include fire setting, cruelty to animals, and difficulty with authority
Often have legal problems resulting from failures to conform to social norms and a lack of concern for the rights of others
Often act out impulsively and fail to consider the consequences of their actions
Display aggressiveness and irritability that often lead to physical assaults
Have difficulty feeling empathy for others
Display a lack of remorse for damaging behavior
Often have poor or abusive relationships with others and are more likely to abuse or neglect their children
Frequently lie and deceive others for personal gain

These characteristics often lead to major difficulties in many life areas. At its core, the inability to consider the thoughts, feelings, and motivations of other people can lead to harmful disregard for others.

As adults, the disorder can be destructive to both the person living with it and those who come into contact with them. People with antisocial personality disorder are more likely to engage in risk-taking behaviors, dangerous activities, and criminal acts.3 Those with the disorder are often described as having no conscience and feel no regret or remorse for their harmful actions.

How to Spot a Narcissistic Sociopath
Diagnosis of ASPD

Symptoms of antisocial personality disorder often begin during childhood, although the condition is often not diagnosed until later in life. As children, it is common for those who develop this disorder to experience violent bursts of anger and show cruelty towards animals. They are also often described as bullies by their peers.

While the condition may begin in childhood, it cannot be officially diagnosed before the age of 18. Kids who display these symptoms are diagnosed with conduct disorder.

In order to be diagnosed with ASPD, a person must display a disregard and violation of the rights of others before the age of 15. This disregard is indicated by displaying at least one of seven symptoms:

Disregard for the safety of the self and others
Failure to obey laws
Impulsive behavior
Irritability and aggression
Lack of remorse for actions
Lying or manipulating others for profit or amusement
Pattern of irresponsibility

In addition to displaying at least one of these symptoms, the person must be at least 18 years old and not display antisocial behavior as a result of another condition such as bipolar disorder to schizophrenia.

According to some critics, the DSM diagnostic criteria are too focused on behaviors related to criminal actions.4 Concerns have been raised that the diagnosis may at times be misapplied to individuals in low socioeconomic or urban settings in which seemingly antisocial behavior may be a part of a protective survival strategy.5 Because of this, it is possible that the prevalence of this disorder has been overstated.

Prevalence

According to the DSM-V, 0.2% to 3.3% of U.S. adults have antisocial personality disorder and the condition tends to affect men more than women.6﻿

Causes of Antisocial Personality Disorder

The exact causes of antisocial personality disorder are not known.3﻿ Personality is shaped by a variety of forces including nature and nurture.

Genetics

ASPD is more common among the first-degree biological relatives of those with the disorder than in the general population. Research suggests that ASPD is likely strongly linked to inheritance and that environmental influences probably exacerbate its development.7﻿

Upbringing

Upbringing can also have an important influence. Childhood abuse, neglect, and trauma have also been linked to the onset of ASPD.8﻿ If a child's parents are abusive and dysfunctional, children may learn such behavioral patterns and later display them with their own kids.

Kids who grow up in disorganized and neglectful homes also lack the opportunities to develop a strong sense of discipline, self-control, and empathy for others.

Press Play for Advice On Healing From Childhood Abuse

Hosted by therapist Amy Morin, LCSW, this episode of The Verywell Mind Podcast, featuring former NFL player Reggie Walker, discusses how to heal from childhood trauma. Click below to listen now.

Follow Now: Apple Podcasts / Spotify / Google Podcasts / Amazon Music

Brain Differences

A number of factors have been found to increase the risk of the disorder, including smoking during pregnancy and abnormal brain function. Research suggests that people with ASPD have differences in the frontal lobe, the area of the brain that plays a role in planning and judgment.9

People with the disorder also tend to require greater stimulation and may seek out dangerous or illegal activities to raise their arousal to an optimal level.

How Personality Impacts Our Daily Lives
Treatments for Antisocial Personality Disorder

Antisocial personality disorder is difficult to treat for a number of reasons. People with the disorder rarely seek out treatment on their own. Those who do generally receive treatment only after some type of altercation with the legal system.

While people with ASPD often come into contact with the criminal justice system, research suggests that incarceration and other punitive measures are largely ineffective since people with the condition are usually unresponsive to punishment.10﻿

Psychotherapy

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) can be useful in helping individuals gain insight into their behaviors and to change maladaptive thought patterns.11 Effective results usually occur only after long-term treatment.

Group and family therapy as well as mentalization-based therapy, which targets the ability to recognize and understand the mental state of oneself and others, have also been studied for ASPD and show promise.12

Medication

Medications may be used to treat some of the symptoms that a person with ASPDl may experience. Some of the medications that may be prescribed include:

Anti-anxiety medications
Antidepressants
Antipsychotics
Mood stabilizers
The Best Online Therapy Programs We've tried, tested and written unbiased reviews of the best online therapy programs including Talkspace, Betterhelp, and Regain.
Coping With Antisocial Personality Disorder

Antisocial personality disorder often has a significant impact on a person's ability to function, which can make it difficult to cope with many aspects of life.

According to the DSM-5, the condition can result in incarceration, injury, or death due to harmful or criminal actions.6
It affects an individual's ability to work and maintain relationships.
The disorder also has the potential to cause harm to friends, family members, co-workers, and strangers who may be harmed by the person's actions.

Most people with ASPD do not seek help on their own and intervention likely only happens due to legal problems. Research suggests that those who have the best outlook are those who have stronger social support and better spousal and family ties.13 

If you have a loved one who has ASPD, you may find it helpful to talk to a mental health professional. They can help you learn coping skills that will help you set boundaries to protect yourself from harm. Group therapy and support groups may also be helpful resources of support and information.

If you or a loved one are struggling with antisocial personality disorder, contact the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) National Helpline at 1-800-662-4357 for information on support and treatment facilities in your area.

For more mental health resources, see our National Helpline Database.

How to Cope With a Personality Disorder
Read More:
PSYCHOLOGY
THEORIES
PERSONALITY PSYCHOLOGY
13 Sources

By Kendra Cherry, MSEd
Kendra Cherry, MS, is a psychosocial rehabilitation specialist, psychology educator, and author of the "Everything Psychology Book."

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback