How Anxiety Can Be a Secondary Emotion

Is anxiety an emotion?

By Will Meek, PhD Updated on March 03, 2024
 Medically reviewed by Rachel Goldman, PhD, FTOS
aldomurillo / Getty Images
Table of Contents
Overview
GAD
Understanding Complex Emotions

Anxiety is a common secondary emotion, one that you experience in place of another that's too difficult to feel or express. This differs from a primary emotion, an initial, direct reaction to something. For example, anxiety can be a secondary emotion for anger, jealousy, hurt, disappointment, embarrassment, or sadness. You can also experience two secondary emotions at once, such as anger and anxiety.

Theoretically, secondary emotions protect you from more complicated or painful feelings. it's easy to think that a situation or occurrence has made you anxious or angry when the true emotion is something different.

Learning about primary and secondary emotions can help you understand yourself and where your reactions are coming from.

Overview

Get Advice From The Verywell Mind Podcast

Hosted by Amy Morin, LCSW, this episode of The Verywell Mind Podcast shares how to recognize and ease anxiety, featuring neuroscientist Dr. Jud Brewer.

Follow Now: Apple Podcasts / Spotify / Google Podcasts

Generalized Anxiety Disorder

For people with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), this can become very complicated. They experience mPeople with chronic, uncontrollable anxiety that causes significant life problems often are diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD). They see most of their life experience through a lens of constant worry, so anxiety is a relatively expected, familiar feeling.

GAD Symptoms

According to the DSM-5, a GAD diagnosis requires anxiety and worry that occurs for at least six months.1 Signs and symptoms of GAD can include:

Imagining every possible negative conclusion to a situation
Difficulty concentrating, or the feeling that your mind "goes blank"
Difficulty handling uncertainty or indecisiveness
Trouble making decisions for fear of making the wrong one
Inability to relax
Persistent, obsessive worrying about small or large concerns that are out of proportion to their importance
Worrying about excessively worrying
Breaking the Anxiety Cycle to Overcome Worry
Physical Health Symptoms

Physical signs and symptoms of GAD can include:2

Being easily startled
Fatigue
Headaches
Irritability
Muscle tension or aches
Sweating
Trembling, feeling twitchy
Trouble sleeping

If you're concerned about your mental health or that of someone you know, contact the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) National Helpline at 1-800-662-4357 for information on support and treatment facilities in your area.

For more mental health resources, see our National Helpline Database.

Understanding Complex Emotions

To discover the true source-the primary emotion-of your anxiety, the first step is simply asking yourself that question. Be open to the possibility that you are hurt, disappointed, or grieving rather than anxious. If you sense actual fear, then your anxiety is likely in the right place. The goal is to make life changes that help alleviate your true negative feelings, so you don't miss out on experiences or continue to worry for "no reason," as many people with GADdo.

By considering that other feelings might lie underneath your anxiety, you're taking a great step toward understanding yourself, having greater emotional intelligence, and improving your situation based on those underlying feelings.

The 7 Best Online Anxiety Support Groups
Read More:
CONDITIONS A-Z
ANXIETY
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
LIVING WITH
2 Sources
See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback