APA Code of Ethics: Principles, Purpose, and Guidelines

Codes, Principles, and Standards for Psychologists

By Kendra Cherry, MSEd Updated on May 05, 2024
 Medically reviewed by Daniel B. Block, MD

Mediaphotos / Getty Images

Table of Contents
Understanding the APA Code of Ethics
APA Code of Ethics' 5 Principles
The APA Code of Ethics' Standards
Violations
Reporting a Therapist
Ethical Considerations
The Big Picture

The APA Code of Ethics equips psychology professionals with standards and principles to follow when dealing with the moral and ethical dilemmas they're likely to face.

Ethics are an important concern in psychology, particularly regarding therapy and research. Working with patients and conducting psychological research can pose various ethical and moral issues that must be addressed.

Understanding the APA Code of Ethics

The American Psychological Association (APA) publishes the Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct1 which outlines aspirational principles as well as enforceable standards that psychologists should use when making decisions.

In 1948, APA president Nicholas Hobbs said, "[The APA Code of Ethics] should be of palpable aid to the ethical psychologist in making daily decisions."2

In other words, the APA Code of Ethics is meant to provide a common set of rules that help ensure mutual safety and patient benefit.

When Did the APA Publish Its Code of Ethics?

The APA first published its ethics code in 1953 and has been continuously evolving the code ever since.

What's in the APA's Code of Ethics?

The APA Code of Ethics comprises two key elements:

Principles: the underlying ethical foundation on which psychologists should base their practices and decisions, whether they work in mental health, research, or business.
Standards: enforceable rules for ethical conduct, the violation of which can have professional and legal ramifications
Who Is the APA Code of Ethics For?

The APA Code of Ethics applies only to work-related, professional activities including research, teaching, counseling, psychotherapy, and consulting. Private conduct is not subject to scrutiny by the APA's ethics committee.

APA Code of Ethics' 5 Principles

Not all ethical issues are clear-cut, but the APA offers psychologists guiding principles to help them make sound ethical choices within their profession.

The APA Code of Ethics' Five Principles
Principle A: Beneficence and Non-Maleficence
Principle B: Fidelity and Responsibility
Principle C: Integrity
Principle D: Justice
Principle E: Respect for People's Rights and Dignity
Principle A: Beneficence and Non-Maleficence

Psychologists should strive to protect the rights and welfare of those with whom they work professionally.3 This includes the clients they see in clinical practice, animals that are involved in research and experiments, and anyone else with whom they engage in professional interaction.

This principle encourages psychologists to strive to eliminate biases, affiliations, and prejudices that might influence their work. This includes acting independently in research and not allowing affiliations or sponsorships to influence results.

Principle B: Fidelity and Responsibility

Psychologists have a moral responsibility to help ensure that others working in their profession also uphold high ethical standards. This principle suggests that psychologists should participate in activities that enhance the ethical compliance and conduct of their colleagues.

Serving as a mentor, taking part in peer review, and pointing out ethical concerns or misconduct are examples of how this principle might be put into action. Psychologists are also encouraged to donate some of their time to the betterment of the community.

Principle C: Integrity

In research and practice, psychologists should never attempt to deceive or misrepresent. For instance, in research, deception can involve fabricating or manipulating results in some way to achieve desired outcomes.4 Psychologists should also strive for transparency and honesty in their practice.

Controversial Psychological Experiments
Principle D: Justice

Mental health professionals have a responsibility to be fair and impartial. It also states that people have a right to access and benefit from advances that have been made in the field of psychology. It is important for psychologists to treat people equally.

Psychologists should also always practice within their area of expertise and also be aware of their level of competence and limitations.

Principle E: Respect for People's Rights and Dignity

Psychologists should respect the right to dignity, privacy, and confidentiality of those they work with professionally.5 They should also strive to minimize their own biases as well as be aware of issues related to diversity and the concerns of particular populations.

For example, people may have specific concerns related to their age, socioeconomic status, race, gender, religion, ethnicity, or disability.

Why Therapists Say Cultural Safety Is Essential in Mental Healthcare
The APA Code of Ethics' Standards

The 10 standards found in the APA ethics code are enforceable rules of conduct for psychologists working in clinical practice and academia.

The 10 Standards Found in the APA Code of Ethics
Resolving Ethical Issues
Competence
Human Relations
Privacy and Confidentiality
Advertising and Other Public Statements
Record Keeping and Fees
Education and Training
Research and Publication
Assessment
Therapy

These standards tend to be broad in order to help guide the behavior of psychologists across a wide variety of domains and situations.

They apply to areas such as education, therapy, advertising, privacy, research, and publication.

1: Resolving Ethical Issues

This standard of the APA ethics code provides information about what psychologists should do to resolve ethical situations they may encounter in their work. This includes advice for what researchers should do when their work is misrepresented and when to report ethical violations.

2: Competence

Psychologists must practice within their areas of expertise. When treating clients or working with the public, psychologists must make clear what they are and are not trained to do.

An Exception to This Standard

This standard stipulates that in an emergency situation, professionals may provide services even if it falls outside the scope of their practice in order to ensure that access to services is provided.

3: Human Relations

Psychologists frequently work with a team of other mental health professionals. This standard of the ethics code is designed to guide psychologists in their interactions with others in the field.

This includes guidelines for dealing with sexual harassment, and discrimination, avoiding harm during treatment and avoiding exploitative relationships (such as a sexual relationship with a student or subordinate).

4: Privacy and Confidentiality

This standard outlines psychologists' responsibilities in maintaining patient confidentiality.6 Psychologists are obligated to take reasonable precautions to keep client information private.

However, the APA also notes that there are limitations to confidentiality. Sometimes psychologists need to disclose information about their patients in order to consult with other mental health professionals, for example.

In cases where information must be divulged, psychologists must strive to minimize these intrusions on privacy and confidentiality.

Should You Tell Your Therapist Everything?
5: Advertising and Other Public Statements

Psychologists who advertise their services must ensure that they accurately depict their training, experience, and expertise. They also need to avoid marketing statements that are deceptive or false.

This also applies to how psychologists are portrayed by the media when providing their expertise or opinion in articles, blogs, books, or television programs.

When presenting at conferences or giving workshops, psychologists should also ensure that the brochures and other marketing materials for the event accurately depict what the event will cover.

6: Record Keeping and Fees

Maintaining accurate records is an important part of a psychologist's work, whether the individual is working in research or with patients. Patient records include case notes and other diagnostic assessments used in the course of treatment.

In terms of research, record-keeping involves detailing how studies were performed and the procedures that were used. This allows other researchers to assess the research and ensures that the study can be replicated.

How to Find the Best Therapist for You
7: Education and Training

This standard focuses on expectations for behavior when psychologists are teaching or training students.

When creating courses and programs to train other psychologists and mental health professionals, current and accurate evidence-based research should be used.

This standard also states that faculty members are not allowed to provide psychotherapy services to their students.

8: Research and Publication

This standard focuses on ethical considerations when conducting research and publishing results.

For example, the APA states that psychologists must obtain approval from the institution that is carrying out the research, present information about the purpose of the study to participants, and inform participants about the potential risks of taking part in the research.

9: Assessment

Psychologists should obtain informed consent before administering assessments. Assessments should be used to support a psychologist's professional opinion, but psychologists should also understand the limitations of these tools.

They should also take steps to ensure the privacy of those who have taken assessments.

Everything to Know About Informed Consent
10: Therapy

This standard outlines professional expectations within the context of providing therapy. Areas that are addressed include the importance of obtaining informed consent and explaining the treatment process to clients.

Confidentiality is addressed, as well as some of the limitations to confidentiality, such as when a client poses an immediate danger to himself or others.

Minimizing harm, avoiding sexual relationships with clients, and continuation of care are other areas that are addressed by this standard.

For example, if a psychologist must stop providing services to a client for some reason, they are expected to prepare clients for the change and help locate alternative services.

Who Can Provide Psychotherapy?
What Happens When a Therapist Violates the APA Code of Ethics?

After a report of unethical conduct is received, the APA may censure or reprimand the psychologist, or the individual may have their APA membership revoked. Complaints may be referred to others, including state professional licensing boards.

State psychological associations, professional groups, licensing boards, and government agencies may also choose to impose penalties against the psychologist.

Health insurance agencies and state and federal payers of health insurance claims may also pursue action against professionals for ethical violations related to treatment, billing, or fraud.

Those affected by ethical violations may also opt to seek monetary damages in civil courts.

Illegal activity may be prosecuted in criminal courts. If this results in a felony conviction, the APA may take further actions including suspension or expulsion from state psychological associations and the suspension or loss of the psychologist's license to practice.

How Can I Report a Therapist for Unethical Behavior?

Unfortunately, therapists do commit ethical violations. If you would like to file a complaint against a therapist, contact your state's psychologist licensing board.7

How to Find Your State's Psychologist Board

Here is a list of the U.S. psychology boards. Choose your state and refer to the contact information provided.

Ethical Considerations

Because psychologists often deal with extremely sensitive or volatile situations, ethical concerns play a big role in professional life.

The most significant ethical issues include:

Client Welfare: Given the roles they serve, psychologists often work with individuals who are vulnerable due to their age, disability, intellectual ability, and other concerns. When working with these individuals, psychologists must always strive to protect the welfare of their clients.
Informed Consent: Psychologists are responsible for providing a wide range of services in their roles as therapists, researchers, educators, and consultants. When people are acting as consumers of psychological services, they have a right to know what to expect. In therapy, obtaining informed consent involves explaining what services are offered, what the possible risks might be, and the patient's right to leave treatment. When conducting research, informed consent involves letting participants know about any possible risks of taking part in the research.
Confidentiality: Therapy requires providing a safe place for clients to discuss highly personal issues without fear of having this information shared with others or made public. However, sometimes a psychologist might need to share some details such as when consulting with other professionals or when they are publishing research. Ethical guidelines dictate when and how some information might be shared, as well as some of the steps that psychologists should take to protect client privacy.
Competence: The training, education, and experience of psychologists is also an important ethical concern. Psychologists must possess the skill and knowledge to properly provide the services that clients need. For example, if a psychologist needs to administer a particular assessment in the course of treatment, they should have an understanding of both the administration and interpretation of that specific test.
The Big Picture

Although the APA Code of Ethics provides respected principles and enforceable standards for professional conduct, psychology is not free from ethical controversy. For example, debates over psychologists' participation in torture8 and the use of animals in psychological research remain hot-button ethical concerns.

Nevertheless, reputable psychologists commonly turn to the APA Code of Ethics for help with moral and ethical issues and decisions commonly faced in their profession.

Read More:
THERAPY
GETTING STARTED
8 Sources

By Kendra Cherry, MSEd
Kendra Cherry, MS, is a psychosocial rehabilitation specialist, psychology educator, and author of the "Everything Psychology Book."

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback