CONDITIONS A-Z
Bipolar Disorder
Living With
Symptoms and Diagnosis
Treatment
 Medically reviewed by Daniel B. Block, MD Updated on July 19, 2024

Bipolar disorder is a mental health condition defined by periods (or episodes) of extreme mood disturbances that affect mood, thoughts, and behavior. There are two main types of bipolar disorders. Bipolar I disorder involves episodes of severe mania and often depression. Bipolar II disorder involves a less severe form of mania called hypomania.1 There is also a third type known as cyclothymic disorder.

Research suggests that around 4.4% of U.S. adults will have bipolar disorder at some point in their lives.2 Genetics are thought to play a significant role, although brain abnormalities and environmental factors also contribute as causes of bipolar disorder. Mood stabilizers are usually the first-line treatment, but electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may be used to address severe symptoms.

LIVING WITH BIPOLAR DISORDER
5 Movies That Portray What It's Like to Have Bipolar Disorder
Speaking to a Loved One With Bipolar Disorder
What It Really Feels Like to Live With Bipolar Disorder
Could Your Child Have Bipolar Disorder?
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
What causes bipolar disorder?

The exact causes of bipolar disorder are not entirely understood. Research has shown that genetics play a significant role. Other causes include changes in the brain as well as environmental factors including childhood trauma or stress caused by major life changes. Understanding the causes may help scientists develop ways to prevent or treat the condition.

Learn More: Understanding the Causes of Bipolar Disorder
Is bipolar disorder genetic?

Research suggests there is a strong genetic component in bipolar disorder. Twin studies have found that when one identical twin has the condition, the likelihood that their twin sibling will also have it is around 40%. While there is a genetic vulnerability, inherited factors interact with environmental influences that can play a role in triggering the disorder's onset.

Learn More: Can You Inherit Bipolar Disorder?
How is bipolar disorder treated?

Bipolar disorder is typically treated with medications and sometimes electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) or transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), therapy, and psychoeducation. Common medications include mood stabilizers or anticonvulsants, as well as second or third generation antipsychotics. Antidepressants are typically avoided if possible due to risks including mania and rapid cycling.

Learn More: Treatment Options for Bipolar Disorder
Is bipolar disorder considered a disability?

Your condition may be considered a disability that is protected by the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or qualifies you for disability payments. If your disability substantially limits your work, you may be able to request reasonable accommodations from your employer. You may qualify for disability benefits if your condition makes it impossible for you to maintain employment.

Learn More: Does Bipolar Disorder Qualify You for Disability?
How do you know if you're bipolar?

Only a doctor or qualified mental health professional can diagnose you with bipolar disorder. You may want to see your doctor if you are experiencing symptoms of mania, depression, or both. Symptoms of mania can include talking excessively, racing thoughts, decreased sleep, and delusions. Symptoms of depression may include fatigue, prolonged sadness, and loss of interest in activities.

Learn More: Symptoms of Bipolar Disorder
KEY TERMS
Bipolar I Disorder
Bipolar II Disorder
Cyclothymic Disorder
Mania
Hypomania
Depression
Psychotherapy
Major Depressive Disorder
Psychiatric Assessment
Mood Charting
Bipolar I Disorder

This type of bipolar disorder involves the presence of at least one manic episode. Manic episodes may last seven days or longer or be severe enough that a person requires acute care. People usually experience depressive episodes as well, but they may also have mixed episodes where they experience depression and mania at the same time.3

Bipolar II Disorder

This type of bipolar disorder is marked by periods of depressive and hypomanic episodes without periods of full-blown mania. It involves at least one episode of depression that lasts at least two weeks and one episode of hypomania that lasts for at least four days. During hypomanic episodes, people have symptoms of mania but are still able to function.3﻿

Cyclothymic Disorder

This condition, also known as cyclothymia, is marked by periods of cycling between hypomania and depressive symptoms. These symptoms are persistent and last for at least two years, but they do not meet the criteria to qualify for a diagnosis as a hypomanic or depressive episode. People who have cyclothymic disorder may have a higher risk for later developing bipolar disorder.

Diagnostic Criteria for Cyclothymic Disorder
Mania

Mania is a phase of bipolar disorder that involves elevated periods of mood, energy, thoughts, and other behaviors. Common symptoms of mania include rapid and excessive talking, grandiose thoughts and beliefs, decreased sleep, flights of ideas or racing thoughts, an inability to keep still, and trouble concentrating.

Signs of Bipolar Mania
Hypomania

Hypomania is a symptom of bipolar disorder that involves racing thoughts, impulsive and other out of character behaviors, and elevated moods. It is marked by increased excitability, irritability, and excess energy. People may seem restless, overly talkative, highly distracted, or overly focused on specific activities. A decreased need for sleep, engaging in risky behaviors, and inappropriate social behavior can also be symptoms.

What Is Hypomania?
Depression

Depression is characterized by a persistent low mood and loss of interest in activities that can have a significant impact on a person's ability to function in daily life. Bipolar depression typically presents with increased sleep, increased appetite (often with carbohydrate cravings), and increased rejection sensitivity.

Can Depression Turn Into Bipolar Disorder?
Psychotherapy

Psychotherapy is an approach to the treatment of mental illness that focuses on thoughts, emotions, and behaviors. For bipolar disorder, psychotherapy often focuses on helping people identify and manage their moods and identify the triggers that contribute to depressive, manic, or hypomanic episodes.

What Is Psychotherapy?
Major Depressive Disorder

Major depressive disorder involves persistently low mood and loss of interest in activities. These symptoms can lead to both physical and behavioral symptoms including poor concentration, low energy, changes in sleep, changes in appetite, poor self-esteem, and difficulty managing daily tasks. Treatment often involves medication, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two.

Symptoms of Depression
Psychiatric Assessment

A psychiatric assessment involves gathering information about mental health symptoms in order to make a diagnosis. An assessment often involves getting a physical exam, providing a medical history, and answering questions about the nature, duration, and severity of your symptoms. A mental health professional can then use this information to make a diagnosis and recommend a treatment plan.

Is There a Mental Illness Test?
Mood Charting

If you have bipolar disorder, charting your moods can be a useful way to look at symptom patterns over time. Monitoring your symptoms on an ongoing basis allows you to learn to recognize stressful life events that may trigger the onset of symptoms. Printable mood charts can be helpful, but there are also mobile apps available.

How to Use a Mood and Anxiety Chart
EXPLORE BIPOLAR DISORDER
Over One-Third of Psychiatric Patients Are Misdiagnosed-Here Are Our Stories
The 8 Best Online Psychiatry Services That Take Insurance, Tried and Tested
Understanding Autism and Bipolar Disorder
Can Bipolar Disorder Show Up in a Brain Scan?
Are There Different Types of Bipolar Disorder?
What's the Difference Between Bipolar I and Bipolar II Disorder?
What Is a Labile Affect?
Hypomania vs. Mania: What's the Difference?
What It's Like Living with a Mood Disorder, As a Mental Health Professional
Is Bipolar Disorder Caused By a Chemical Imbalance?
Can Bipolar Disorder Cause Brain Damage?
What Is Therapy for Bipolar Disorder?
Can Bipolar Disorder Be Cured?
How Do I Know If I Have Bipolar Disorder?
Understanding the BPD Favorite Person Relationship
An Overview of Mental Health Statistics 
Bipolar Depression Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment
Bipolar Disorder Symptoms in Men
What Medications Are Used to Treat Bipolar Disorder?
Bipolar Disorder Symptoms in Women
What to Know About Coming Out of a Manic Episode
Differentiating Subtypes of Bipolar Disorder
Treating Bipolar Disorder
Loving With Bipolar Disorder: A Letter to My Husband
What Does the Term 'High-Functioning' Bipolar Disorder Mean?
Helpful Online Bipolar Disorder Support Groups
The Impact of Bipolar Disorder on Sex
Tips for Dating Someone With Bipolar Disorder
Living With Bipolar Disorder
Does Bipolar Disorder Qualify You for Disability?
What Not to Do if You or a Friend Has Bipolar Disorder
Racing Thoughts and Bipolar Disorder
How Long Do Manic and Depressive Episodes Last?
Techniques to Tame the Fight-or-Flight Response
Spring Mania: What It Is and What to Do If It Happens
Understanding Bipolar Disorder and Narcissistic Personality Disorder
What Is a Thought Disorder?
What Is Emotional Lability?
What Are Somatic Delusions?
Treatment for Psychosis
What Is Thought Broadcasting?
Understanding Euthymia in Bipolar Disorder
Vivid Dreams, Nightmares, and Night Terrors in Bipolar Disorder
Rapid-Cycling Bipolar Disorder Symptoms, Risks, and Treatment
Delusions Occurring in Bipolar Disorder
Symptoms and Causes of Tardive Dyskinesia
Ideas and Delusions of Reference in Bipolar Disorder
Mood Congruence and Incongruence in Bipolar Disorder
Mixed Episode Criteria for Bipolar Disorder
Clang Association in Bipolar Disorder and Schizophrenia
What Is Psychosis?
Understanding Bruxism and How It Relates to Mental Health
What Is Bipolar Psychosis?
What Are Hallucinations?
Differences Between Bipolar Disorder and Schizophrenia
What Is Apathy?
How Sleep and Bipolar Disorder Interact
What Is Akathisia?
Flight of Ideas in Bipolar Disorder
Understanding Mania and Manic Episodes
Quiz for Bipolar Hypomania Episodes
What Is Hypomania?
Symptoms of Mania in Bipolar Disorder
More In Conditions A-Z
Neurodivergence
Phobias
Anxiety
Kids' Mental Health
Addiction
ADHD
Eating Disorders
BPD
Depression
Neurological Disorders
PTSD
OCD
Panic Disorder
Schizophrenia
Page Sources