What Is Body Scan Meditation?

Release Tension With This Targeted Meditation Technique

By Elizabeth Scott, PhD Updated on February 12, 2024
 Reviewed by Megan Monahan
fizkes / Getty Images
Table of Contents
Benefits of Body Scan Meditation
How to Do a Body Scan Meditation
How it Reduces Stress
Tips

Body scan meditation (BSM) involves paying attention to parts of the body and bodily sensations in a gradual sequence from feet to head. This method can help people become more aware of their physical sensations, emotions, and feelings.

Body scan meditation is an excellent way to release physical tension you might not even realize you're experiencing. Sometimes you can be so caught up in your stress that you don't realize that the physical discomfort you're experiencing-such as headaches, back and shoulder pain, and tense muscles-is connected to your emotional state. 

By mentally scanning yourself, you bring awareness to every part of your body, noticing any aches, pains, tension, or general discomfort. The goal is not to relieve the pain entirely but to get to know and learn from it so you can better manage it.

At a Glance

Body scan meditation can help you become more aware of your body, including the physical sensations and feelings that can stem from stress. By building this awareness, you'll be better able to respond when you start to experience physical discomfort connected to your emotional states. Let's take a closer look at some of the key benefits and explore a step-by-step guide to practicing body scan meditation.

Benefits of Body Scan Meditation

Best when performed daily (or even several times a day), practicing body scan meditation is associated with many mental and physical health benefits.

Reduced stress is one important benefit of body scanning, which can have physical benefits such as reduced inflammation, fatigue, and insomnia.1 In this way, this body scanning works to break the cycle of physical and psychological tension that can feed on itself.

Research suggests that having a regular meditation practice can have other benefits, such as:2

Lower blood pressure
Less pain
Better sleep
Reduced anxiety and stress3
Better emotional regulation
Increased self-awareness

Because body scan meditation improves awareness, it helps people learn to better recognize and respond to their own internal signals.4

The body scan meditation is a very useful and effective meditation that can help you return to and maintain a relaxed state when you become too tense.

Press Play to Learn More About the Mind and Body Connection

This episode of The Verywell Mind Podcast discusses the mind and body connection. Click below to listen now.

Follow Now: Apple Podcasts / Spotify / Google Podcasts / Amazon Music

How to Do a Body Scan Meditation

As with all forms of meditation, doing a body scan is meant to be simple. Below are some instructions to get you started.

Get Comfortable

Lying down is preferable, particularly if you're doing a body scan meditation before going to sleep. If that's not possible or comfortable, sitting comfortably is also an option.

Take a Few Deep Breaths

Let your breathing slow down, and start breathing from your belly instead of from your chest, letting your abdomen expand and contract with each breath. If you find your shoulders rising and falling with each breath, focus more on breathing from your belly, as though a balloon is inflating and deflating in your abdomen with each breath.

You may find it helpful to regularly practice different breathing exercises as well.

Bring Awareness to Your Feet

Now slowly bring your attention down to your feet. Begin observing sensations in your feet. If you notice pain, acknowledge it and any thoughts or emotions that accompany it, and gently breathe through it.

Mindful Moment

Need a breather? Take this free 9-minute meditation focused on awakening your senses-or choose from our guided meditation library to find another one that will help you feel your best.

Breathe Into the Tension

If you notice any uncomfortable sensations, focus your attention on them. Breathe into them, and see what happens. Visualize the tension leaving your body through your breath and evaporating into the air. Move on when you feel ready.

Scan Your Entire Body

Continue this practice with each area of your body, gradually moving up through your feet until you reach the top of your head. Notice how you feel and where you're holding your stress.

If there's any tightness, pain, or pressure, continue to breathe into any tightness, pain, or pressure you're feeling. This can help you release tension in your body now, and be more aware of it in the future so you can release it then, too.

How Can Body Scan Meditation Reduce Stress

Oftentimes, our bodies are experiencing one thing while our mind is focused on something else. The stress and anxiety we experience affect the body, but it can feel like our minds are disconnected from the physical effects of this stress.

Body scan meditation helps rebuild this connection. Instead of worrying about the future or ruminating on the past, scanning the body forces us to be present at the moment. It's a practice that helps us check in with ourselves and assess what we are experiencing so we can relax and ease the stress before it takes a serious toll on our well-being.

One study found that an eight-week body scan meditation program resulted in lower levels of the stress hormone cortisol.5

Tips for Practicing Body Scan Meditation

Meditation is most effective when you make it a regular practice, but making it a habit isn't always easy. Here are some tips that can help you make body scan meditation a part of your daily routine:

Do it often: The body scan meditation can promote body awareness, stress awareness, and relaxation. Practice this body scan meditation anytime you feel stress or several times throughout the day as a regular practice.
Try a brief body scan: If you don't have much time, you can do an abbreviated version of this body scan meditation by just sitting and noticing any place in your body where you're carrying tension rather than moving from part to part. This will become easier the more you practice the body scan meditation.
Incorporate other relaxation techniques: You can also try progressive muscle relaxation, breathing exercises, or visualization exercises for releasing stress and tension in your body.
Keep in Mind

Body scan meditation can be a great way to get more in touch with your body, how you feel, and how stress affects you physically. Making it a part of your regular self-care routine can help you reap the stress-relieving rewards of this type of meditation. Start by setting aside 15 each day to practice body scanning.6 As you make this more of a habit, you'll find that you are more aware of your sensations and better able to respond in ways that help relieve tension and promote good mental well-being.

Best Guided Meditations
Read More:
LIVING WELL
MINDFULNESS AND MEDITATION
6 Sources

By Elizabeth Scott, PhD
Elizabeth Scott, PhD is an author, workshop leader, educator, and award-winning blogger on stress management, positive psychology, relationships, and emotional wellbeing.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback