A Complete Guide to Buddhist Meditation: Principles, Techniques, and Benefits

The art of mindful living

By Julie Nguyen Updated on April 05, 2024
 Reviewed by Alicia Bigelow, ND

Pyrosky / E+ / Getty

Table of Contents
The Principles of Buddhist Meditation
Different Techniques and Practices of Buddhist Meditation
Benefits of Buddhist Meditation
Step-by-Step Guide to Practicing Buddhist Meditation
Deepening Your Buddhist Meditation Practice
Integrating Buddhist Meditation Into Daily Life
Common Misconceptions and FAQs About Buddhist Meditation
Resources for Further Exploration

Meditation is an ancient practice exercised for thousands of years by different religions and cultures. A common meditative practice is connecting to the body, finding non-judgmental awareness, and achieving equanimity. In the process of stilling the mind, the chaotic noisiness of our thoughts can re-clarify into a spiritual insight attributed to inner wisdom and relaxed alertness. 

Buddhist meditation is rooted in Buddhism, an Indian religious teaching and philosophy attributed to Buddha. The tradition dates back to ancient texts, the Pali Canon. In contemporary times, Buddhist meditators view meditation as liberation; a tool to understand the nature of reality to move towards freedom from suffering, and the first step to an enlightened awakened state known as nirvana.

Master Svietliy, philosophy, and meditation teacher and sacred symbolism artist explains Buddhist meditation as a way to explore the depths of our minds, recognize our interconnectedness with all beings, and develop a deep sense of empathy.

"Buddhist meditation is much more than a tool for achieving tranquility. It's a profound journey towards understanding the true nature of our existence, aimed at cultivating wisdom and compassion, the cornerstones for enlightenment," Svietliy says.

The Principles of Buddhist Meditation

Buddhist philosophy is centered on the premise that human life is a cycle of suffering, karma, and reincarnation. Buddhist philosophy is closely related to meditation because they believe in using mindfulness to break out of the cycle of endless suffering to attain enlightenment.

Buddhism is commonly defined as including Southeast Asian Theravada Buddhism, East Asian Mahayana Buddhism, Indo-Tibetan Mahayana, and Vajrayana Buddhism.

To those who practice it, Buddhist meditation is a way of life and works to nurture a healthy relationship with the mind. Below are a few of the core principles of Buddhist meditation:

Mindfulness: "Fully inhabit the present moment, recognizing that 'now' is all we truly have. This principle helps us observe our thoughts and experiences without attachment, aiding in cultivating a peaceful mind," says Svietliy.
Impermanence: "I stress the importance of acknowledging impermanence, which allows us to appreciate each moment without clinging to it," he notes. It is futile to hold onto shifting, changing elements in a transient world. By welcoming impermanence as fact, it is a reminder that much of our life is ephemeral, including our emotions, thoughts, and experiences.
Compassion: "Foster a loving and kind attitude towards all beings, including ourselves," says Svietliy. Developing compassion connects practitioners with suffering that exists within the human condition to move toward loving, compassionate thoughts towards self and others.
Suffering: Buddhist meditation recognizes suffering as an inherently universal concept because of our desire for attachment and asserts we can end our suffering by freeing ourselves from the never-ending loop of hypnotic, unhelpful desires that do not serve us.1 Doing this connects us back to the ultimate nature of our mind.
Non-self: The non-self principle challenges the belief that we have a permanent, unchanging soul. Buddhists believe we have a constant, changing self and to find that it involves releasing desires, finding compassion, and meditating.2 These practices aim to break the illusion of the self by dissolving its psychological framework to reduce attachment.
Different Techniques and Practices of Buddhist Meditation

Within Buddhist meditation, various forms offer practitioners numerous pathways to explore and expand their minds. These practices complement one another, serving as necessary components to cultivating compassion, wisdom, and deep understanding. 

These can be done in a meditation posture that gives you a comfortable but alert state that doesn't hurt your back or knees, which includes kneeling, lying down, cross-legged, sitting in a chair, or standing up. Complete the meditations in a quiet place, indoors or outside.

Here are a few popular examples of Buddhist meditation: 

Samatha Meditation

One of the main kinds of Theravada meditation, Samatha aims for calm concentration to find internal peace by letting go of desires and cravings.3

Sit in a relaxed posture, bring your hands to your lap or at your knees, and then bring full awareness to the normal pattern of your breath without manipulation. Deeply inhale and exhale. As restless thoughts float in and out of your mind, observe each one, accept them, and let it go.

The intention is to reduce cognitive chatter and let your mind be at rest, increase presence in the moment, and promote tranquility.

Vipassana Meditation

Vipassana meditation, one of the other main kinds of Theravada meditation, aims for inner insight and to see things as they really are.4 Through self-observation without attachment, the meditator can deconstruct the illusions behind the ego and explore different aspects of existence such as impermanence, dissatisfaction, and non-self.

Sit in a relaxed posture and attend to the physical sensations and breath in the body, gently noticing distractions and shifting back to the breath.

The intention is to channel consciousness to calmly see past distractions to understand the true reality. Vipassana meditation is a purification of the mind.

Metta Meditation

Metta meditation is a loving-kindness meditation, where we practice and sink in the feeling of unconditional kindness.5 To do this, sit in a comfortable position and place attention on your heart, focusing on the breath in the chest. Repeat the phrase, "May I be happy. May I be well. May I be safe. May I be peaceful and at ease," until the field of warm, loving kindness grows. 

Then widen the scope of unconditional love and repeat the phrase directed to loved ones, communities, and everyone you've known-including individuals that you may consider difficult. Place the image of yourself or the people you are focusing on in your mind's eye.

The intention is to cultivate compassion, love, and kindness for all living beings and things and radiate positive energy.

Benefits of Buddhist Meditation 

Numerous studies have shown meditation's ability to improve sleep, manage insomnia, process information, and control the brain's response to pain. By engaging in Buddhist meditation, you can train the mind towards helpful thoughts and behaviors and positively change the way you perceive your experiences.6

Buddhist meditation has many physical benefits. Research has found MRI scans show activation within the emotional, executive, and cognitive centers of the brain to change the brain structures related to emotional regulation, improving brain functioning for memory and attention. The results hold promise for age-related brain aging in younger and middle-aged individuals because of its capacity for appropriate telomere shortening.

From a body perspective, the same study notes meditation has assistive benefits for the immune system and inflammatory processes by decreasing cytokines. It can help bring down elevated blood cholesterol levels and multi-factorial diseases including diabetes, hypertension, and fibromyalgia.7

From a mental health perspective, meditation calms down the sympathetic nervous system and can bring about positive emotions, reducing mental health concerns like social anxiety disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), anxiety, and depression.

"In my experience, the emotional benefits of Buddhist meditation extend far into everyday life. It nurtures an inner peace and emotional stability that enhances our resilience in facing life's challenges," Svietliy says. "It fosters clarity, reduces stress, and cultivates joy and well-being, not only during meditation but in every aspect of our lives."

Step-by-Step Guide to Practicing Buddhist Meditation

Practicing a few minutes a day can help foster a calmer state of consciousness. By meditating, you can let thoughts pass without focusing on any particular story. By detaching from distractions, you can be an observer of your thoughts, which supports a more peaceful state of mind.

Svietliy provides a few steps to get started with your Buddhist meditation: 

Find a quiet space: Select a peaceful area where interruptions are minimal.
Adopt a comfortable posture: Sit in a way that keeps your back straight yet relaxed.
Focus on your breath: Gently close your eyes and direct your attention to the rhythm of your breathing.
Observe without judgment: As you observe your breathe, thoughts are bound to arise. This kind of wandering is natural. When it happens, softly acknowledge this and return your focus to your breath.
Be consistent: Try to meditate daily, starting with just a few minutes and gradually increasing the duration.
Stay open and curious: As your practice evolves, exploring different meditation techniques can enrich your experience.
Deepening Your Buddhist Meditation Practice

As a beginner meditator, learning how to still your mind for extended periods can be a challenge. It's a gradual process of learning how to relax, noticing your thoughts, and being aware of your surroundings.8

"The ideal environment for meditation offers tranquility and minimal disturbance. However, I've learned that adaptability is key," Svietliy says.

Being able to find inner peace regardless of external circumstances is a testament to a mature practice.

- MASTER SVIETLIY

For beginners, he recommends a short daily routine, such as weaving a mindful breaths practice before a new activity. "Challenges in meditation are inevitable but invaluable for growth. I encourage practitioners to view these moments with curiosity and openness, using them as opportunities to deepen their understanding."

As distractions arise, acknowledge them and bring your mind back to the present moment. You might notice yourself thinking about work, email, what you're doing after, or the text you have to respond to. All of that can be attended to later. Sit with your urgent restlessness and refocus back on your breath or mantra.

It's important to cultivate a compassionate attitude and not judge or shame yourself for not having an "enlightened" or "peaceful" experience. Your experience just is, and that's exactly what is needed at the moment. 

"For more experienced meditators, I recommend experimenting with longer sessions or different forms of meditation to deepen their practice," he says. "Remember, the essence of meditation is about cultivating awareness in every moment beyond the confines of formal practice."

Integrating Buddhist Meditation Into Daily Life

Meditation and bringing full awareness to your life can start off small. It can be as simple as waking up in the morning and kicking off the day with gratitude to set a positive intention for the rest of the day.

As you move, mindfulness can permeate everything that you're doing and how you attend to your breath. As you eat, you slowly focus on the flavors and textures of the bite and your breath as you walk. When you're in conversation with others, be present in the conversation by thoughtfully choosing your words and actively listening. 

Mindfulness can apply to every situation. Even now as you're reading this story, you can notice your posture and how you're sitting in your chair. Be aware of what you're doing, whether that's sipping a cup of tea or working at the computer.

Common Misconceptions and FAQs About Buddhist Meditation

There are several misconceptions and myths about Buddhist meditation. Here are a few things people get wrong:

The idea that Buddhist meditation is not for everyone. Meditation is for everyone, and anyone can do it with enough skills to practice.
The idea that Buddhist meditation is about sitting cross-legged on a mat in an expensive yoga studio or an idyllic retreat center. In fact, Buddhist meditation can happen anywhere, anytime, and at any moment. You can find inner peace in your mind when you're washing the dishes, in the middle of traffic, or feeling stressed about a co-worker.
The idea that Buddhist meditation is about clearing the mind of everything. Rather, it's about giving your mind something to focus on: the breath for example.
The idea that Buddhist meditation is only for Buddhists. Buddhist meditation is based in Buddhism, but the method of stilling the mind is non-denominational and people from all backgrounds and religions can benefit from its practices.
The idea Buddhist meditation is a band-aid for problems and offers instant results. A consistent practice requires daily effort to reap the benefits.

Svietliy likens meditation to a sandbox-a place to explore-for real-life challenges. "It's not just about sitting quietly; it's about bringing awareness into every moment of our lives. It teaches us to receive the world around us and respond with conscious intention," he says.

This practice of presence and mindfulness allows us to navigate life's complexities with grace and compassion, truly embodying the teachings of meditation in every thought and action.

- MASTER SVIETLIY
Resources for Further Exploration

Here is a compilation of research-backed resources to help you dive deeper into Buddhist meditation: 

Websites:

Buddhanet - Buddhist meditation website links 
Tricycle - Buddhism for beginners 
Access Insight - an extensive collection of books, essays, and commentaries 

Books: 

"Wherever You Go, There You Are: Mindfulness Meditation in Everyday Life" - Jon Zabat-Zinn 
"The Heart of the Buddha's Teaching: Transforming Suffering into Peace, Joy, Liberation" - Thich Nhat Nhan 
"Buddha's Book of Meditation: Mindfulness Practice for a Quieter Mind, Self-Awareness, and Healthy Living" - Joshua Emet and Thich Nhat Nhan 
"What the Buddha Taught Me" - Wapola Rahula 

Retreats: 

Mountain Stream Meditation: insight meditation retreats, day longs, classes, and sitting groups in the Sierra Nevada region of California 
Seattle Insight Meditation Society - Buddhist center holding residential retreats yearlong
Local Buddhist temples and communities offer meditation classes and retreats with information for upcoming events 
Vipassana meditation - 10-day retreat center to learn the basics of this type of meditation.

Whether you're new to Buddhist meditation or expanding your practice, the teachings can provide timeless wisdom and practical techniques that can benefit people of all kinds. By incorporating these practices, you can move through life with greater purpose and resilience. 

Read More:
LIVING WELL
MINDFULNESS AND MEDITATION
8 Sources

By Julie Nguyen
Julie Nguyen is a certified relationship coach and mental health and sexuality writer. Her writing explores themes around mental well-being, culture, psychology, trauma, and human intimacy.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback