Can Meditation Actually Save Your Sex Life?

Bringing mindfulness to the bedroom

By Wendy Wisner Published on August 27, 2024
 Reviewed by Alicia Bigelow, ND

Lisa Valder / E+ / Getty

Table of Contents
Understanding Sexual Meditation
Exploring the Connection Between Meditation and Sexuality
Techniques for Sexual Meditation
Benefits of Integrating Meditation and Sexuality
Addressing Common Questions and Concerns

Sex and meditation are not two things we tend to think of as a pairing. One is typically quiet, relaxing, peaceful, and still. The other is, well...sex.

But meditation is not just about sitting crossed legged on the floor and trying to empty your mind. Meditation is simply being mindful. That can happen during a formal meditation practice, while taking a walk, washing the dishes, as well as including "body-centered techniques", such as focusing on sensory perceptions.1

So what happens when you combine sensory-focused meditation and mindfulness with sex? Well, you get something called sexual meditation. "Sexual meditation is the practice of combining meditation techniques with sexual activity or intimate connection to deepen physical and emotional awareness," says Sophie Cress, LMFT, licensed marriage and family therapist at SexualAlpha. "Its purpose is to enhance the sexual experience by fostering a state of mindfulness, where both partners are fully present and attuned to each other." Research shows that combining mindfulness with sex can increase sexual health and satisfaction.2

Ready to take a deep dive into meditation and sexuality, including how to practice more meditative sex, either alone or with a partner? We've got you covered.

Guided Meditations
Understanding Sexual Meditation

The concept of sexual meditation is fairly open-ended. It's simply when you combine sex or sexuality with ideas of mindfulness and meditation. That can look different for different folks.

Shamyra Howard, LCSW, AASECT, certified sex therapist and sexologist at Womanizer, defines sexual mediation like this: "Sexual meditation involves focusing on the present moment and being fully aware of sensations, emotions, and thoughts during sexual activity, whether solo or with a partner."

Sexual meditation combines the practice of mindfulness and the concept of body awareness3 by focusing on breath and sensation without judgment. "It's all about allowing yourself to exist and feel all the feels," Howard says.

Sexual meditation is a conversation between the mind and body, and it's a process of expressing gratitude for what your body can do and feel in the moment.

- SHAMYRA HOWARD, LCSW, AASECT

Brian Tierney, PhD, licensed psychologist at The Somatic Doctor, describes sexual meditation as a "presence practice," or a type of body awareness discipline that enables a person to develop the capacity to perceive more and more pleasure. "The purpose is to take more delight in life, to experience the expansive pleasure of having a body-in-relationship," he says.

"Sexual meditation can delightfully combine the benefits of a mindfulness practice-the training of the mind to remain present, usually by noticing how much it escapes to the past and future-with an expansion of body awareness so that every nook and cranny of the body can tingle with a maximum amount of pleasure from moment to moment," Dr. Tierney adds.

What Is Body Positivity?
Exploring the Connection Between Meditation and Sexuality

Meditation and sexuality are more connected than many of us realize, says Howard. That's because sexuality is not just about sexual pleasure or gratification. "Sexuality includes emotional, psychological, and social dimensions," she says. "It's a fluid aspect of human identity that incorporates our sexual preferences, desires, behaviors, and expressions." and is influenced by not only biology but psychological and social factors as well.4

In other words, sex already has some aspects of mindfulness in it, because you can't experience sexual pleasure without being attuned to your senses. What adding mindfulness does to the equation is that it can make sex all the more pleasurable. "The benefits of sexual meditation include enhanced arousal, desire, orgasm, and overall sexual well-being," Howard describes.

How to Be More Sexually Intimate With Your Partner
Techniques for Sexual Meditation

Alright, let's get down to business. How exactly can you integrate sexual meditation practices into your sex life?

First, it's important to note that many people have complicated relationships with their bodies, which may be related to pain, past traumas, disability or body image concerns. For that reason, when practicing sexual meditation, it is important to move at a pace that feels comfortable to you. Second, sexual meditation and mindful body awareness is something you can do solo, or with a partner. It's really up to you, and the techniques described below work in both instances. However you are doing it, Cress recommends starting by setting the mood. "To practice sexual meditation, one can begin by setting a calm, intentional environment free from distractions," she advises.

Howard shared her top tips for getting started with your sexual meditation practice:

Breathe

Howard suggests breathing slowly with your eyes closed, in through your mouth and out through your nose. "Place one hand on your belly and the other on your genital area, and as you breathe in and out, think of what would feel good, no judgment," she explains. "It's okay if you get a genital response, and it's OK if you don't." You're just here to feel and explore.

If you are with a partner, you can breathe together this way. "Then, you and your partner can place a hand on each other's genitals while breathing together," Howard suggests. Again, keep it a no judgment zone, just letting each other feel whatever you feel.

Take it Slow

Mediative sex is usually by its nature, very slow-slow and intentional. This can be great for many people, but also has challenges. "This slow sensory experience can bring up different emotions and feelings," Howard shares. "Some people laugh, some cry, some have the best orgasm they've ever had. Remember, this isn't a time to judge yourself. This is a time to allow yourself to feel."

Feel the Feels

Mindful sex is all about letting yourself lean into whatever sensation you are feeling, and just really feel them. Howard suggests paying attention to textures, temperature, and pressure.

Ask yourself questions like, "What does it feel like when you breathe in and out?" or "How does your or your partner's genital area feel under or in your hand?"

Howard suggests slowly rubbing your hands over different body parts, placing your attention on skin texture and temperature. If you are with a partner, you can "use your mouth to tell your partner where to touch you," Howard says. "Or use your hand to guide your partner to where you'd like them to touch you."

Practice Delaying Orgasm

Howard recommends sinking into each moment during sex, feeling each sensation deliberately. "During partnered sex, go slow and continue to focus on sensations," Howard says. "Pay attention to sounds, smells, and tastes to keep you grounded in the moment."

Often, this slowness means not rushing to "get off" or orgasm. "Practice edging or delaying orgasm at least three times and focus on the sensations only," she suggests. Sometimes you may not end up orgasming at all, but often you will, and you may find that these orgasms are super intense and pleasurable.

What Is a Brain Orgasm?
Benefits of Integrating Meditation and Sexuality

Sexual mediation has numerous benefits-just take it from Dr. Tierney, a huge proponent of sexual meditation, both personally, and for his clients. For him, sexual meditation is about taking sex slowly, so that you can focus on each sensory moment.

"The simple story for me is that when I finally learned how to engage in slow sex, to truly divest from chasing orgasms, it felt like I lost my virginity again (seriously)," he shares.

Dr. Tierney also shared some client stories, which illustrate some of the benefits of integrating mediation and sexuality:

"One couple felt like they were starting their marriage over again after 26 years of being together."
"Another couple laughed so hard while they were practicing slow sex that they had to take a pause, not because they were reaching 8.88 on the orgasm scale, but because their ribs started cramping up."
"Another couple realized that they had been avoiding looking at each other during sex for decades and decided to make more eye contact: it completely transformed their love live and radically diminished their highly-entrenched conflicts which were basically a result of them not seeing eye-to-eye."

The research on the benefits of meditative sex mostly focuses on women, with several studies finding that women who meditate experience increase sexual function.5 The experts we spoke to say that sexual meditation isn't just beneficial for women, and it doesn't just make you have better sex or orgasms.

According to Cress, the benefits of sexual meditation include:

Enhanced emotional intimacy
Improved sexual satisfaction
Reduced performance anxiety
Better communication between partners
Helping people overcome sexual blocks or inhibition by promoting self-awareness and relaxation
More meaningful and pleasurable sexual experiences

How to Cope With Sexual Anxiety
Addressing Common Questions and Concerns

While sexual meditation may sound awesome on paper, but that doesn't mean people won't experience doubts or concerns.

One concern people have is that sex should not be a discipline-because the idea of discipline runs counter to the idea of sex and letting go, says Dr. Tierney. But this is a misconception, according to Dr. Tierney, and the benefits of the practice outweigh any doubts about intentionality or scheduling.

"This is a hang-up that should be left behind if you want to meet your pleasure and bliss potential together," he says. If your goal is mind-blowing, sensual sex, you should know that it often takes practice and discipline, Dr. Tierney says.

Another question people have about sexual meditation is: "Am I doing it right?" Howard says that any suggestions about sexual meditations are just that-suggestions. You get to decide what feels right for your body, and what meditative sex means to you. "Explore to find out what works best for you," Howard recommends.

Finally, people often feel concern that sexual meditation will take out the mystery behind sex or make it less spontaneous or romantic. But Cress says you don't need to worry about that. "With guidance and practice, individuals often find that sexual meditation enhances rather than detracts from the natural flow of intimacy, helping them to become more present and connected," she assures.

How Important Is Sex in a Relationship?
Conclusion

If you are looking to have more sensational sex-sex where all of your senses are awakened and on fire-sexual meditation might be just what you need. Sexual meditation is just what it sounds like: it means practicing mindfulness, intentionality, and bodily/emotional awareness during sexual acts.2 It's not for everyone, but people who practice it often experience increased pleasure, deeper connection, and more meaningful sex.

Please contact a licensed mental health professional or a sex educator if you would like more information about sexual meditation or if you have general questions about sex and sexuality.

Why Sexual Aftercare Is So Important and How to Practice It
Read More:
LIVING WELL
MINDFULNESS AND MEDITATION
5 Sources

By Wendy Wisner
Wendy Wisner is a health and parenting writer, lactation consultant (IBCLC), and mom to two awesome sons.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback