Can Anxiety Kill You?
By Brittany Loggins Updated on December 27, 2023
 Medically reviewed by Akeem Marsh, MD

Maskot / Getty Images

Table of Contents
What Is Anxiety?
What Is a Panic Attack?
How to Get Help for Anxiety
Coping With an Anxiety Disorder
How to Help Someone With Anxiety

Anxiety can be incredibly distressing. Sometimes, such as when you are having a panic attack, it might even feel like death is imminent. After such episodes, you might find yourself wondering, can anxiety kill you?

The good news is that while anxiety is stressful and sometimes scary, it won't kill you. It's the effects of long-term, untreated anxiety that put your life at risk. Anxiety can increase your blood pressure, worsen cardiovascular health, weaken your immune system, and increase the risk of suicide.

Everyone experiences anxiety, but if it gets to the point where you're struggling with its side effects, it may be time to get some help.

At a Glance

While anxiety itself will not kill you, it has been linked to heart disease, as well as several other symptoms that can pose severe threats to your health.

Below, we've outlined exactly what anxiety is, as well as its physical symptoms and long-term impacts. We also go over panic attacks and anxiety disorders so that you can better understand what causes them. Finally, we talk about how to support someone in your life who has severe anxiety and how to get help if you're living with anxiety.

What Is Anxiety?

The American Psychiatric Association defines anxiety as "an emotion characterized by feelings of tension, worried thoughts, and physical changes like increased blood pressure."1

That said, anxiety can manifest itself differently for everyone, but it often feels like a constant, nagging worry that just won't go away.

While sometimes worrying can be warranted (in some cases it may be your brain's way of protecting you from real danger), anxiety leans more to unfounded worries that won't go away.

Things to pay attention to if you think you're experiencing an abnormal amount of anxiety are the length of time that your feelings persist, the intensity of the feelings of nerves, and the inability to focus on an exact cause.2

Physical Symptoms of Anxiety

Anxiety may be taking place in your mind, but the side effects can certainly manifest in a physical way. While there are lots of physical side effects that can pop up, these are the most common.

General anxiety may include one or more of these symptoms,however, panic attacks often include many of them at once:3

Restlessness
Increased heart rate
Shortness of breath or the feeling of your throat closing in
Dry mouth
Chest pain
Headaches
Nausea
Trembling or shakiness
Sudden sweating or chills
Long-Term Affects of Anxiety

Researchers at the Anxiety Disorders Program at Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center believe that4 there are ties between long-term anxiety and the development of heart disease.

Perhaps what's most interesting about this research is that it determined that anxiety can not only lead to a higher risk of developing heart disease, but it can also act as an obstacle for those recovering from heart disease.

One of the reasons why this is thought to impact the heart4 is that it interferes with lots of things, like regular exercise and eating well, that can stave off the occurrence of heart disease.

In addition to making it hard to stick to schedules or do daily tasks, anxiety can lead to rapid heart rate, increased blood pressure, and decreased heart rate variability-all of which put you at a higher risk for developing heart disease.

Research has also shown that anxiety can actually damage the brain and increase the risk of developing dementia later in life. It can also put people at a higher risk of developing depression.5 This is because it was found to lead to structural degeneration of the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus.

Getting to Know The Physical Symptoms of Anxiety
What Is a Panic Attack?

Panic attacks can definitely make people think that they're dying, and this is primarily because they share so many symptoms in common with heart attacks.

Panic attack and heart attack victims both typically experience sudden chest pains, heavy heart palpitations, sweating, shortness of breath, and a number of other symptoms.

The "Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders" (DSM-5-TR) defines panic attacks as "a sudden sense of fear and dread."6

That said, to be classified as a panic attack, this sudden sense of fear and dread must be accompanied by at least four other mental, emotional, and physical symptoms. These symptoms can include any of the general symptoms of anxiety listed earlier if they occur in a sudden manner.

Types of Panic Attacks

It's also important to note that there are two main types of panic attacks:

Expected
Unexpected

An example of an expected panic attack would be if a person with a known phobia (think small spaces or spiders) knows that they're going to be exposed to that fear. Unexpected panic attacks come out of nowhere and aren't a result of any mental or external triggers.6

Can You Die From a Panic Attack?

While terrifying, panic attacks are not fatal. The symptoms you experience during a panic attack may make it feel that you are dying and may even be mistaken for a life-threatening condition such as a stroke or heart attack.

Panic attacks are usually brief, lasting around five to 20 minutes. If your symptoms don't resolve within this time, contact your doctor to rule out a more serious medical condition.

How to Get Help for Anxiety

Treatment for anxiety typically focuses on the use of cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT). This type of therapy involves identifying negative thought patterns that play a role in causing anxiety and then replacing those thoughts with more positive ones.

Other types of therapy that may be helpful for anxiety (depending on the specific type of anxiety that is being treated) include:

Systematic desensitization
Exposure therapy
Dialectical behavioral therapy (DBT)
Acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT)
Psychodynamic therapy
Art therapy
Interpersonal therapy (IPT)

There are plenty of mental health professionals who specialize in the treatment of anxiety disorders. If you're experiencing anxiety that just won't go away, you need to talk with your doctor or with a cognitive-behavioral therapist to determine if you have one of the following anxiety disorders:

Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)
Panic disorder
Separation anxiety disorder
Social anxiety disorder (SAD)
Phobia-related disorders (such as agoraphobia and specific phobias)

After providing you with a diagnosis, your therapist will have an idea of how to treat your specific anxiety disorder.

Coping With an Anxiety Disorder

While considering therapy is a great option if you're not already going, here are some in-the-moment tips for managing your anxiety:7

Utilize Mindfulness Practices

Whether you like to meditate, practice yoga or simply take a walk, taking a moment to remove the focus from the subject that you're anxious about is beneficial.

Limit Alcohol and Caffeine

Alcohol and caffeine can affect how you experience anxiety. These substances can make you more anxious, especially when consumed in excess. Limiting your intake, particularly in the afternoon and evening, may help you better manage feelings of anxiety.

Get Regular Physical Exercise

You will feel much better once you get the endorphins pumping. This doesn't have to be extensive, but enough to increase your heart rate. Research has found that exercise can be an effective treatment for anxiety.8

Get Enough Sleep

Sleep plays an important role in mental health, and it can even affect anxiety levels. Anxiety can make it more difficult to get a good night's sleep, but poor sleep can also contribute to worsened anxiety.9

When you're experiencing higher levels of stress, your body needs more rest. Listen to it.

12 Tips for Better Sleep With Anxiety
Take Deep Breaths

Breathing exercises have been shown to help reduce anxiety.10 This is especially relevant to the exact moments when you're experiencing a spike in your anxiety levels. Deep breathing can help you control feelings of anxiety in the moment and may help stave off feelings of fear in the future.

Identify Anxiety Triggers

Learn your triggers. Pay attention to the moments when your anxiety really kicks in and make note of what's happening leading up to those moments.

These 9 Breathing Exercises Can Help Relieve Anxiety
How to Help Someone With Anxiety

If you're watching a loved one struggle with severe anxiety, it can take a serious toll on your own mental health. That said, there are some things you can do to offer them effective support.

Here are some ways you can help someone who is experiencing anxiety:11

Don't enable: If you're continually making concessions for someone because of their anxiety, it can have the adverse effect of helping them avoid things that they should learn to face head-on. This could end up leaving them more limited in the long run.
Don't force confrontation: Leave confrontation to the person's therapist. Trying to push someone when they aren't ready can lead to them resenting you.
Express validation: Don't minimize their fears or nerves in any way. Instead, let them know that you understand that different people are triggered by different things, largely as a result of their past experiences.
Express concern: If you notice that your loved one is avoiding things that they used to love or just generally withdrawing more and more from social situations, it's OK to point that out to them using specific examples.

If you or a loved one are struggling with anxiety, contact the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) National Helpline at 1-800-662-4357 for information on support and treatment facilities in your area.

For more mental health resources, see our National Helpline Database.

Takeaway

If you are experiencing anxiety or know someone who is, it's can be understandably scary. Make sure that you seek help or encourage your loved one to seek help. Also, make sure you start to pay attention to any triggers that lead to more severe episodes, this way you can help your therapist reach a more conclusive diagnosis.

How to Help Someone With Anxiety
Read More:
CONDITIONS A-Z
ANXIETY
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
LIVING WITH
11 Sources

By Brittany Loggins
Brittany is a health and lifestyle writer and former staffer at TODAY on NBC and CBS News. She's also contributed to dozens of magazines.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback