I Swapped My Morning Coffee for Black Tea-Here's How My Energy Shifted

That's that me…Earl Grey tea

By Naydeline Mejia Updated on February 13, 2025
 Medically reviewed by Rachel Goldman, PhD, FTOS
 Fact checked by Andria Park Huynh

Verywell Mind / Michela Buttignol / Getty Images

Table of Contents
The Benefits of Tea
Drinking Daily Cups of Tea
Should You Drink Tea for Energy?
Should You Drink Tea to Boost Your Mood?

When it comes to the popular tea and coffee debate, I will always, always choose coffee. For one, I've never really enjoyed the smell of herbal tea, let alone the taste. I remember gagging as a little kid at the smell of my mom's "natural cold remedy" and immune-boosting red onion and apple tea whenever she would make it before bed. Also, famously, I refuse to drink tea whenever I'm feeling sick, preferring a good night's sleep, chicken broth, and over-the-counter cold and flu medicines. 

Nevertheless, as I've matured, so have my taste buds. Over the holidays, I spent a month in the South of India, where-in addition to eating the best Indian food I've ever had-I was also introduced to the gastronomic magic that is masala chai tea. After consuming so many cups of delicious masala chai for 30 days, apart from searching for a good chai latte that even comes close to the masala chai I had in India at local cafés, I have also become more open to exploring other types of teas after being a certified tea-hater for so many years. So when I got this assignment in my inbox, I said: "What the heck, sure." 

I knew this challenge wasn't going to be easy because apart from being a coffee drinker since I was 14, and routinely drinking a minimum of eight ounces a day, having my daily cup of joe is sort of a ritual for me. Growing up in a Latine household, I was used to having my three-ounce cup of espresso, or cafecito, twice a day-once in the morning and again in the evening after dinner. Alas, I was up for the experience. 

To do this experiment correctly, I tagged nutrition and holistic health experts to get their feedback on the relationship between teas and mood as well as energy.

The Benefits of Tea

Before I get into the details of my experiment, let me preface with the many benefits of tea.

Depression, Anxiety, and Mood

Because of its lower caffeine content, black tea can be a great way to get the mood-boosting benefits of coffee without the jitteriness and possible insomnia as a result of too much coffee, says Alicia Bigelow, ND, a naturopathic physician, holistic therapist, and Verywell Mind review board member. 

While teas that contain adaptogenic herbs, such as ashwagandha or rhodiola, and botanicals, like lemon balm and chamomile, can help reduce stress and promote a sense of calm, says Supatra Tovar, PsyD, RD, a clinical psychologist and registered dietitian, Rhodiola rosea tea, specifically, has been shown to have a possible antidepressant effect on humans.1

Herbal teas like lavender or passionflower, meanwhile, are excellent for relaxation without drowsiness, Dr. Tovar adds.

Energy Levels

"Black tea and matcha both contain caffeine, which can enhance alertness and focus," says Dr. Tovar. They also offer additional benefits not found in coffee. "Matcha, in particular, is rich in L-theanine, an amino acid that promotes calmness and helps counteract caffeine's jittery effects," Dr. Tovar explains. "This combination provides a smoother, more sustained energy boost without the crashes often associated with coffee."

Energy-Boosting Teas

Some other teas and herbs that have energy benefits, per Dr. Tovar, include:

Yerba mate: This coffee alternative contains caffeine "but also antioxidants and polyphenols that support brain function and mood stability." Maté may also have the potential to help with weight loss2 and the prevention of chronic diseases when paired with a nutrient-rich diet.3
Green tea: Similar to matcha, it contains L-theanine, "which improves cognitive function and reduces stress while still offering mild stimulation."
Peppermint tea: Famously caffeine-free, but "its refreshing properties can enhance mental clarity and reduce fatigue."
Ginseng tea: "An adaptogen that helps the body manage stress and sustain energy levels throughout the day."
I Tried Turmeric Lattes to Boost My Energy-Here's What Happened
Drinking Daily Cups of Tea

So, how did drinking black tea daily affect my mood and energy? Here's how I felt after each day of drinking an eight-ounce cup of tea:

Day 1

Despite sleeping in after attending a late-night concert the day before, I woke up this Tuesday morning feeling slightly sluggish. In addition to the late bedtime, I was also on my period so naturally I was feeling quite low energy. Around 11 a.m. I had my first cup of Earl Grey tea with oat milk. I felt the effects immediately, energized for most of the morning and early afternoon. Around 3 p.m. I hit a caffeine crash-or what felt like one.

As a coffee drinker, hitting a midday slump is nothing out of the ordinary-which is why I'm usually grabbing my second cup of joe around this time. Nevertheless, because I was working from home on this day and didn't require heaps of energy, I opted to ride the slump out.

Day 2

I started my Wednesday around 9 a.m. with a cup of Earl Grey tea alongside breakfast. I felt pretty energized for most of the morning, but by the time I arrived at brunch with my friends at 1 p.m., I was ready for another cup of tea. I had a late evening class that day and knew I would be on campus until 8 p.m., so refilling my tank was in order.

To experiment a little, I opted for a coconut matcha latte on the restaurant's menu. I'm not a huge fan of matcha as the taste is too rich and earthy for my liking, but I found the coconut milk lightened the strong matcha taste. The tall, 16-ounce glass of matcha definitely gave me the energy boost I needed to make it to the end of the day. 

Day 3

On Thursday, I began my day bright and early at 7 a.m. I had my typical Earl Grey tea with oat milk alongside a hearty breakfast of avocado toast topped with eggs and a banana on the side. I was babysitting from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m., so I needed to make sure I was energized for the day ahead.

I was feeling fine until around 1 p.m. when I hit a bit of a slump. Nevertheless, given that I went to bed at 2 a.m. the night before and had a 6 a.m. wake-up time, it was hard to tell if my crash in energy was due to lack of caffeine or lack of sleep-most likely a mix of both. 

Day 4

On Friday, things started to get complicated. After three days of not drinking espresso, I was beginning to feel symptoms of caffeine withdrawal. Although black tea has a high concentration of caffeine, it's considerably less, compared to coffee.4 As such, I was experiencing a slight headache. Around 3 p.m. I made myself another cup of earl grey tea-about six hours after my usual morning cup. The second cup definitely re-energized me and helped alleviate my headache for a few hours, too. 

Day 5

As it was Saturday, I had a later start to the day than usual. I had my first cup of Earl Grey tea with oat milk alongside my typical breakfast of avocado toast around 11 a.m. I spent most of the day at home, working on an article and recovering from a late Friday night drinking copious amounts of red wine at a friend's housewarming. Overall, I didn't feel the need to have another cup of tea since I was mostly bed-rotting and catching up on a new Netflix series. 

After five days of forgoing coffee for black tea, I definitely see the appeal of a daily cup of tea, especially if you're someone who doesn't like the taste of coffee or is looking for a caffeine alternative that doesn't have the same intense side effects as espresso. 

I Swapped My Morning Coffee for Ginger Shots-Here's What It Did for My Energy
Should You Drink Tea for Energy?

It really depends on what you're looking for. 

"Due to its higher caffeine content, some people prefer coffee to boost energy," says Dr. Bigelow. 

But if you're someone who's particularly sensitive to caffeine, tea can be a wonderful alternative to coffee for energy, says Dr. Tovar. "The presence of L-theanine in teas like green tea and matcha provides a balanced energy lift without the anxiety or insomnia that coffee can sometimes cause-especially when consumed later in the day." 

It's worth noting that while coffee can increase alertness and concentration in the short term by blocking adenosine, the neurotransmitter responsible for making you feel drowsy, it also stimulates the stress hormone cortisol, which can lead to jitteriness and disrupted sleep, Dr. Tovar explains. "Tea, on the other hand, provides a more stable energy boost due to L-theanine's calming effect," Dr. Tovar says. So for those who struggle with anxiety, mood swings, and poor sleep, tea is generally a safer option.

The presence of L-theanine in teas like green tea and matcha provides a balanced energy lift without the anxiety or insomnia that coffee can sometimes cause-especially when consumed later in the day.

- SUPATRA TOVAR, PSYD, RD

If you're looking to make the switch, Dr. Bigelow recommends starting off with matcha tea. It's the best of both worlds with a higher caffeine content while having the calming effect of L-theanine, she says. Additionally, if you switch from coffee to black tea, you may notice a short-term drop in energy due to the lower caffeine levels, whereas matcha has a closer caffeine content to coffee, so that effect is less pronounced or not at all noticeable, Dr. Bigelow adds.

Feeling Sluggish?

While tea is generally an antioxidant-rich alternative to coffee, sometimes what your body needs isn't a quick-fix drink. Besides tea, some other natural ways to boost your energy and mental clarity in the longer term include:

Staying hydrated ("Even mild dehydration can lead to fatigue," says Dr. Tovar)
Daily movement through stretching or walking for circulation and oxygen flow
Eating fiber-rich, balanced meals to prevent energy crashes
Getting sunlight to regulate your circadian rhythm
Synchronizing Your Biological Clock With a Schedule
Should You Drink Tea to Boost Your Mood?

While it's true that certain teas and herbs can help alleviate stress, anxiety, and even depression, keep in mind the foundations of mental health and consider why your mood may be off in the first place. 

Lack of sleep and movement as well as high blood sugar levels from consuming too many carbohydrates are all factors that can contribute to poor mood apart from major negative life events. "Regular exercise or movement that you enjoy-such as dancing, jogging, walking with a friend, or yoga-can do wonders for your mood, along with reducing stress and helping you sleep more soundly," says Dr. Bigelow. 

Eating foods high in omega-3 fatty acids (salmon, walnuts, and flaxseeds), magnesium (dark leafy greens, almonds, and pumpkin seeds), and probiotics (yogurt and fermented foods) can also support brain health, the gut-brain axis, and mood regulation, Dr. Tovar advises.

Lastly, consider breathwork and meditation to deal with everyday life stressors. "Even just five minutes of deep breathing or guided meditation can significantly reduce stress and improve mood stability," says Dr. Tovar.

Mindful Moment

Need a breather? Take this free 6-minute meditation focused on cultivating joy-or choose from our guided meditation library to find another one that will help you feel your best.

Are Mushroom Supplements the Key to Boosting Your Brain Health?
Takeaways

While I won't be swapping my daily cup of espresso with oat milk for tea as I prefer the taste of coffee (sorry, not sorry), I do think it's worth experimenting with different sources of energy and mood regulation. 

Although I did find black tea to offer me a balanced energy boost, I wouldn't say I felt more or less alert than after drinking a cup of joe. Honestly, my energy levels were about the same and that probably has to do with me not relying on caffeine as my main source of energy and mood regulation.

For example, movement is a major part of my life-either through weekly high-intensity cycling classes or flamenco courses-and these activities leave me feeling way more energized and mentally stable than any beverage can. For longer-term mental health benefits, I also rely on therapy and daily gratitude journaling. 

"Ultimately, the goal, as I see it, is to not have to rely on caffeinated beverages for energy or mood, but to be able to enjoy them in their own right as and when you wish," says Dr. Bigelow. As someone who enjoys a sugary latte for the flavor more than anything, I couldn't agree more. Everyone has their comfort beverage, and coffee is simply my bias.

I Swapped My Afternoon Coffee for Greens Powder-Here's What It Did for My Energy
Read More:
LIVING WELL
SELF-IMPROVEMENT
4 Sources
See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback