I Swapped My Afternoon Coffee for Greens Powder-Here's What It Did for My Energy

Don't talk to me before I've had my...greens

By Nick Ingalls, MA Published on May 09, 2025
 Medically reviewed by Alicia Bigelow, ND
A greens powder can help balance out a vitamin deficiency, but can it boost your energy?.

bee32 / Getty Images

Table of Contents
The Greens Powder Experiment
What's in a Greens Powder, Anyway?
Greens Powder Benefits
Should You Try It?
Alternative Options

The older I get, the more I turn into my dad, foregoing the night owl tendencies of younger days and accepting my birthright as one of those annoying morning people who's ready to go at the crack of dawn. When I start my workday, I've already been up for 2+ hours and squeezed in a workout (like I said-annoying).

All of which is to say that I don't lack for morning energy. I do make a cup of coffee, but it is as much about the process and habit itself as it is about getting a caffeine boost. By the time I take my first sip, I'm already feeling energized and ready for the day.

But when the inevitable midday lull comes and visions of my couch start running through my mind, I can't help but think about a second (or third, or fourth...) cup of coffee to help get through the rest of the day. Whenever I give in, though, I end up regretting the extra caffeine later that night while I'm staring at the back of my eyelids begging my brain to turn off.

So, at the recommendation of some co-workers who are more in-tune with alternative solutions than I am, I decided to test out a dramatic (for me) life change, swapping out my afternoon coffee for a greens powder drink to try to give my energy a boost. After three weeks of testing a greens powder, here's how it went.

The Greens Powder Experiment
Day 1: Going Green

Armed with a shaker bottle that had been collecting dust in a forgotten cabinet in my house, I started the day like any other, with an early morning gym class and a coffee as soon I walked through my office door. With my morning energy needs fulfilled, all I had to do was go about my day and wait for the inevitable mid-afternoon slump.

As soon as my brain started to get a little mushy, around 2 p.m., I scooped my powder, filled up 10 oz of water, gave it a shake, and gave my new habit a first taste. Thankfully, it was good, which made the next few weeks a whole lot easier than they could've been.

So, did I feel an instant lightning bolt of energy flow through me and wake up every last nerve ending in my body? Not quite, but I absolutely felt something. For the rest of the work day, I felt more awake, more alert, and more ready to actually run through the finish line of the work day.

What's more, I didn't feel jittery or like I was stretched a little too thin, both of which can happen after too much caffeine. And come bedtime, I didn't notice any unexpected difficulty getting to or staying asleep.

I know how the placebo effect works, so I didn't get too excited, but I would consider my first exploration into the world of greens powder a pretty unambiguous success.

Week 1

As you probably know, the one of the hardest parts of keeping a habit is starting it. Luckily, trying a greens powder wasn't so much a new habit as a like-for-like replacement, and feeling it work was all the positive reinforcement I needed to keep at it day after day.

While the novelty did start to wear off by the end of the first week, I continued to feel a similar boost of energy and alertness through the last few hours of the work day. On my days commuting to and from the office, however, I'd generally feel as sluggish as usual on my ride home.

As far as I could tell, the greens powder effects were not long-lasting or powerful to overcome the effects of a day that starts at 6:30 a.m. And that's fine-the commute home is for decompressing anyway. And, as on day 1, I didn't feel any lingering buzz of energy keeping me up at night.

Week 2

Week 2 went pretty much the same as week 1, with one interesting wrinkle-on one of the days this week, I got caught up in meetings in the afternoon and couldn't find a minute to mix my drink. The result? I was absolutely dragging by 4 o'clock.

While the meetings didn't help, I was pretty sure that missing out on any kind of afternoon energy booster played a big part in feeling like I'd never make it through the day. I guess sometimes the best way to test if something is helping is to see what happens when you don't get it.

Week 3

So, after three weeks of afternoon greens powder, I think I may be a greens guy now? No, I'm nowhere near ready to give up the sanctity of my morning coffee, but I don't miss that second coffee at all. My big takeaway is that I don't need to stick to one energy booster or another simply because that's the way I've always done it.

I tried something new, and it worked for me, which is pretty much all you can ask from trying something for the first time. Was it a cure-all? Of course not, but by this point I felt confident enough that my increased alertness and energy was more than just a placebo effect in action.

Also, by cutting out any extra coffee, I realized that I've been able to cut my sugar intake quite a bit. While I usually drink my coffee black, I'm often tempted to add some sugar or sugar-filled creamer for a little extra kick in the afternoon. With no afternoon coffee, I've removed that added sugar entirely.

I Swapped My Morning Coffee for Black Tea-Here's How My Energy Shifted
What's in a Greens Powder, Anyway?

When I think of a green vegetable-based drink, I imagine a bunch of random leafy foods blended together into a dark green sludge that is very nutritious-if you can stomach it. Like something Rocky Balboa would drink after downing some raw eggs for breakfast. Thankfully, a greens powder drink is not that. The powder I tested was extremely tasty-so what's in it? The greens powder blend contains the following ingredients, all organic:

Barley grass
Kale
Alfalfa
Wheatgrass
Oat grass
Lemon juice
Chlorella
Astragalus

It may read like a list of things you wouldn't want to drink, but the final product tasted good. I do feel compelled to note that, as far as I can tell, this wild strawberry kiwi powder contains neither strawberry nor kiwi. The combination of additional ingredients like pomegranate juice, monk fruit extract, and other natural flavors did the trick, however, without sugar or artificial sweeteners like aspartame.

Finally, this powder is labeled as gluten-free, vegan-friendly, and non-GMO. If you're looking to try a greens powder, you should always read the label, says Eliza Savage, MS, RD, CDN. She stresses the importance of confirming the following:

That you recognize what all the ingredients are
That you aren't ingesting something that may interact with medications you're taking (especially if the product contains herbs or botanicals)
That the product is third-party tested or has a trusted certification such as NSF, USP, or Informed-Choice
That additional ingredients, such as probiotics or digestive enzymes, are not duplicative with other supplements you may already be taking

Be sure that you know exactly what is in your product.

- ELIZA SAVAGE, MS, RD, CDN
Greens Powder Benefits

The goal of my experiment was to help boost my energy, so while I'm focusing on that, I will mention that this and many greens powders also purport to help with things like gut health and immune support.

As with all supplements, any statements regarding the potential benefits of this greens powder have not been evaluated or approved by the FDA. It's important to talk to your doctor before incorporating any supplement into your diet.

On the nutrient front, the powder boasts hefty servings of vitamin C (100% of the recommended daily value), vitamin D (100% DV), and vitamin B12 (420% DV). While it is generally preferable to get your nutrients through food rather than supplementation, we all know that's not always possible. A lot of research has investigated the impact of deficiency in these vitamins, and how supplementation or increasing your intake can help:

A deficiency in vitamin D, which we naturally absorb mostly through sun exposure, can lead to an increased risk of depression, leading to increased fatigue and decreased energy and mood.1
Research suggests that a moderate deficiency in vitamin C, found in citrus and other foods, can lead to an increased risk of physical fatigue as well as a higher risk of poorer mental health outcomes.2
B vitamins, including B12, help your body convert food into energy, and are often connected to brain function. B vitamin deficiencies can potentially lead to impaired memory, mood changes, and cognitive issues.3

"Research supports the fact that vitamins like B12, C, and D can indirectly impact energy levels and fatigue," says Savage. "If you have a deficiency in one of these nutrients, you may feel tired, as each is involved in energy metabolism and creation."

As with many supplements, the research does not always line up with the stated benefits. When it comes to vitamin B12, for example, the body only absorbs as much as it needs and the excess is excreted. So B12 supplementation may only benefit you if you're deficient.

"Vitamin B12 is necessary for critical energy-related pathways in the body, such as red blood cell formation and DNA synthesis," Savage says. "If you have a deficiency, it can lead to anemia, which can present as fatigue and weakness."

All that said, let's face it, a lot of us tend to have some deficiencies when it comes to our nutrient intake. Supplementation is not a magic wand, but it's worth exploring if your doctor agrees that it can help make up for gaps in your diet.

Should You Try It?

If you work a 9 to 5 job-especially one that doesn't have you moving around much-you may be resigned to facing an afternoon slump day after day. But it doesn't have to be that way! If you think you might benefit from the same kind of boost I was aiming for without loading up on caffeine and sugar, a greens powder is worth a shot-as long as your doctor gives you the OK. If you aren't already loading up on vitamin supplements, this should be a safe option.

Savage reminds us that the effects are far from guaranteed. "If you aren't already deficient in these nutrients, you may not notice the 'boost,'" she says. "I always recommend working with a healthcare practitioner to determine if you have a deficiency, and if so, how to best treat it."

As for cost-this particular powder costs about $60 for a 30-serving bag. At $2 per serving, it's more expensive than a home-brewed cup of coffee but cheaper than the average Dunkin' or Starbucks coffee, so it won't break the bank if you typically rely on the latter for your afternoon energy fix.

Alternative Options

In general, Savage urges caution with the many supplements on the market that tout energy-boosting benefits. "I recommend steering clear," she says. "Instead, opt for something that contains caffeine, like a cup of coffee or a kombucha, which can give you a boost. If that causes you jitters, maybe matcha."

Don't neglect the other quick (and free!) midday energy boosters that are available to you as well. A quick walk outside your home or your workplace-or really any form of body movement-can do wonders to reinvigorate you.

"Additionally, many times people feel fatigue when they are actually dehydrated," Savage says. "Grab a glass of water and drink up. You'll feel more energized instantly-or you'll at least have to take a walk to the bathroom that will get your energy up and at 'em!"

So whatever kind of midday slump you may be dealing with, there are plenty of options out there to help give you the boost you need to get through the day upright.

Takeaways

As someone who tends to be a skeptic of anything in the realm of natural remedies, I wouldn't be calling my greens powder test a success if I hadn't experienced some tangible benefits. If you're looking for an entry point into the world of vitamin supplementation, I'd recommend this option based on my experience. But given the evidence, I'll also take a look at my diet to see if I might be vitamin-deficient.

"Think of a greens powder like a Band-Aid," Savage says. "It may cover your nutritional bases for a bit, but it will not replace the need to eat your fruits and vegetables. Commit to getting enough sleep, water, and a healthy, balanced diet."

I Swapped My Morning Coffee for Ginger Shots-Here's What It Did for My Energy
Read More:
LIVING WELL
SELF-IMPROVEMENT
3 Sources

By Nick Ingalls, MA
Nick Ingalls, MA is the editorial director at Verywell Mind, managing new content production and editorial processes. He has been with Verywell since its inception in 2016.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback