A Beginner's Guide to Chakra Meditation

It's time to balance out those energy centers

By Sanjana Gupta Published on January 17, 2024
 Reviewed by Alicia Bigelow, ND

Goodyboy Picture Company / Getty Images

As a yoga enthusiast, I love trying different types of meditation. Although it sounds super simple, most of us know that sitting still and paying attention is a lot harder than it sounds. That being said, guided meditations can be easier and more interesting because they tell us what to focus on and help us maintain our concentration.

One of my favorite types of guided meditation is chakra meditation. Chakra meditation is an ancient wellness practice that is designed to unlock the energy centers (chakras) in our bodies.1

Chakra meditation helps us feel more grounded, centered, connected, and peaceful, says Karla Helbert, an internationally certified yoga therapist (C-IAYT) and author of "The Chakras in Grief and Trauma."

If you're curious about chakra meditation and how to get started with it, here's everything you need to know.

At a Glance

Whether you're a seasoned yogi or a newbie, chakra meditation is worth a try. 

Chakras are invisible energy centers in our bodies, positioned from the base of the spine to the top of the head. There are seven in total and each one corresponds to different colors and functions. 

Chakra meditation helps us explore each of our seven chakras. The process can help you feel more positive, relaxed, and grounded. It can be a great way to level up your self-care routine!

5-Minute Video Meditation for Starting Fresh
Introduction to Chakra Meditation

Chakra meditation is an Eastern spiritual practice that dates back thousands of years. The earliest references to it are found in ancient Indian yogic texts dating back to around 1500-1200 BCE.1 It was later adopted by other spiritual systems, such as Hinduism, Buddhism, and Jainism.

"Chakra" is a Sanskrit word that means "circle," "disc," or "wheel," says Helbert. There are seven chakras in total, positioned from the base of the spine to the top of the head.2 Although the chakras aren't scientifically recognized, in the context of this belief system, they are invisible energy centers within the body that vibrate and spin with energy.

Each chakra influences the glands in its vicinity.2 Therefore, each chakra corresponds to different qualities and functions, Helbert explains. Imbalances or blockages in any of the chakras are linked to physical or mental health problems.

Chakra meditation helps us realign the chakras and bring our body back into balance. When the chakras are aligned and activated, they vibrate at a higher frequency, giving us energy and vitality.

The chakras regulate and generate functions that impact us physically, energetically, emotionally, mentally, sensorially, intuitively, and spiritually.

- KARLA HELBERT, YOGA THERAPIST
The Seven Chakras

Before we go further, let's take a quick tour of the seven chakras.

Root Chakra

Name: Muladhara

Location: Base of the spine

Color: Red

Associations: Health, safety, security, and stability

Imbalances: Fear, insecurity, anxiety, financial stress, and substance use

Sacral Chakra

Name: Svadhisthana

Location: Lower abdomen (a little below your belly button)

Color: Orange

Associations: Creativity, passion, pleasure, and emotional well-being

Imbalances: Creative blocks, emotional instability, dependency issues, and intimacy issues

Solar Plexus Chakra

Name: Manipura

Location: Upper abdomen (above your belly button)

Color: Yellow

Associations: Confidence, willpower, gut instincts, and inner strength

Imbalances: Low self-esteem, difficulty concentrating, control issues, stress, and digestive difficulties

Heart Chakra

Name: Anahata

Location: Center of the chest (near your heart)

Color: Pink or green

Associations: Love, compassion, forgiveness, and emotional balance

Imbalances: Lack of empathy, relationship difficulties, and heart problems

Throat Chakra

Name: Vishuddha

Location: Throat area

Color: Blue

Associations: Communication, truth, honesty, clarity, and inspiration

Imbalances: Fear of speaking, difficulty expressing oneself, nervousness, sore throat, clogged sinuses, and tooth, gum, or jaw pain

Third Eye Chakra

Name: Ajna

Location: Center of your forehead (between your brows)

Color: Indigo

Associations: Intuition, insight, imagination, and spiritual awareness

Imbalances: Lack of clarity, difficulty making decisions, eye problems, headaches, migraines, and sleep issues

Crown Chakra

Name: Sahasrara

Location: Top of the head

Color: Violet or white

Associations: Spirituality, divine connection, and enlightenment

Imbalances: Depression, loss of faith, and lack of purpose

How Emotions and Organs Are Connected in Traditional Chinese Medicine
Preparing for Chakra Meditation

If you'd like to give it a try, here's how you can prepare and set the mood for a chakra meditation session:

Pick a quiet place: Find a quiet and comfortable spot where you won't be disturbed. 
Dress comfortably: Wear something loose and comfy.
Bring your props: If you find them helpful, you can use props such as a cushion or bolster to help you be more comfortable during the session.
Set the mood: If you like, you could set the mood by dimming the lights or lighting a candle.
Play some music: Some people enjoy playing soft, instrumental music or nature sounds while they meditate. Choose music that relaxes you but doesn't distract you.
Silence your devices: Power down your devices or put them on silent mode so they don't disturb you.
Choose a meditation program: If you like, you can find a guided meditation program online that you can play. Or, you can follow the step-by-step guide described below.
The 7 Best Meditation Apps of 2024
Step-by-Step Guide to Chakra Meditation

Once you've set the mood and you're ready to get started, here's a step-by-step guide to chakra meditation:

Get comfortable: Lie down on your back or sit cross-legged with your back straight and your hands resting on your knees. Make any minor adjustments you need to get comfortable. Use any props you want.
Close your eyes: Gently close your eyes and turn your focus inward.
Take deep breaths: Start by taking a few deep breaths. Focus your attention on your breath as it comes and goes. 
Start at your root chakra: Bring your attention to the base of your spine. Picture roots growing from your body into the earth, connecting you and keeping you grounded. Visualize the color red as you take deep breaths in and out.
Move up to your sacral chakra: Move your attention upward to your sacral chakra, which is a little south of your belly button. Imagine an orange glow, symbolizing creativity and passion. Breathe into this area, allowing creativity to flow into you. 
Come to your solar plexus chakra: Shift your attention a little higher, to your solar plexus chakra. Envision a yellow light radiating from this area, representing personal power and confidence. With each breath, imagine that you're inhaling strength and exhaling all your self-doubts.
Focus on your heart chakra: Next, bring your focus higher, to the heart chakra in the middle of your chest. Visualize a green or pink light in your chest that expands outward with each breath. Think thoughts of love, compassion, and forgiveness-toward others and yourself.
Bring your attention to the throat chakra: Direct your attention to your throat chakra. Picture a blue light in your throat that's helping you to always speak clearly, truthfully, and assertively.
Shift to the third eye chakra: Slowly, shift your focus upward, to the middle of your forehead, where your third eye would be. Imagine an indigo light that's taking over your mind, clearing it of clutter and leaving only clarity behind.
Go up to the crown chakra: Finally, bring your attention to the top of your head, to the crown chakra. Picture the color white, elevating you to a higher state of consciousness where you are one with the divine.
Picture all your chakras in alignment: Visualize all your chakras being in alignment, from base to tip. Picture the energy flowing upward through your body, healing you and giving you strength.
Scan your body: Do a quick body scan, starting from your toes and moving upward. If you sense any tension or discomfort anywhere, breathe deeply into that area and focus your healing energy there. 
Come back to the present: When you're ready to finish, take a few deep breaths and gradually bring your focus to the present. Slowly open your eyes. Wiggle your fingers and toes. If you're lying down, sit up gently.
Reflect: Take a few minutes to reflect on your meditation session. Note any sensations, thoughts, or insights that came up for you. You can write them down, if you like.
How Meditation Impacts Your Mind and Body
Potential Benefits of Chakra Meditation

These are some of the possible benefits of chakra meditation:

Reduces stress: Chakra meditation is a calming and relaxing practice that can help us reduce our stress and anxiety levels.
Promotes positivity: Chakra meditation incorporates elements like visualization and affirmations, which promote positivity.
Targets issues: Chakra meditation, because of the focus on specific chakras, can help us target any issues we're experiencing, says Helbert. As a holistic practice, it can complement medical treatment.
Improves concentration: The practice of concentrating on each chakra can enhance our ability to focus and pay attention.
Enhances self-awareness: Chakra meditation involves introspection and self-reflection. We learn to observe our thoughts, feelings, and bodily sensations, which contributes to greater self-awareness.
Increases energy levels: I always feel refreshed and energized after a session of chakra meditation. Doing it after my workout gives me a boost of energy to take on my day.
Promotes spiritual growth: For those seeking spiritual growth, chakra meditation provides a framework for exploring higher states of consciousness and deepening our connection to divine energy.
Improves sleep: The relaxation induced by chakra meditation can help improve sleep.

Chakra meditation helps us feel more grounded, centered, connected, and peaceful.

- KARLA HELBERT, YOGA THERAPIST

A 2019 study found that doing chakrayoga meditation twice a week for six weeks led to greater mindfulness, lower stress, better well-being, and fewer medical symptoms.3

It's important to note that while many people find chakra meditation beneficial, everyone's experience is different. It's always advisable to approach such practices with an open mind, and if you have specific health concerns, consult with a healthcare professional beforehand.

Tips for Deepening Your Chakra Meditation Practice

These are some tips that can help you deepen your chakra meditation practice.

Be Consistent

Consistency is key. Set aside dedicated time for chakra meditation each day, even if it's just for a few minutes. 

You can do it early in the morning, for more energy during the day. Or, you can do it at night, to get better and more restful sleep. The best time to meditate is the one that works best for you!

Extend Your Sessions

You can start with shorter sessions that are just a few minutes long. As you get more comfortable with it, you can increase the length of your sessions.

You can work out a rhythm where you do shorter sessions on weekdays and explore deeper sessions on the weekends, when you have more time.

Add Affirmations

One of the most powerful ways to level up your chakra meditation practice is to add affirmations to it.

These are some chakra-specific affirmations to try:

Root chakra: "I am safe, secure, and grounded."
Sacral chakra: "My creativity is flowing freely."
Solar plexus chakra: "I am strong, powerful, and confident. I believe in myself and my abilities."
Heart chakra: "I love myself and everyone around me. I am open to the beauty and joy that life offers."
Throat chakra: "My thoughts and words are filled with truth and authenticity."
Third eye chakra: "I trust my intuition and inner wisdom."
Crown chakra: "I am divine and enlightened."

If you like, you can also create your own affirmations for each chakra.

Incorporate Gestures

Mudras are hand symbols or gestures that are used in many yogic and meditation practices. There is a specific mudra linked to each of the seven chakras. 

Practicing the mudra during the meditation is supposed to help you unlock your energy. It also helps you feel more grounded in the present moment.

Keep a Journal

After you finish meditating, it's important to take a moment to reflect on the experience and examine any thoughts and feelings you encountered.

If you like, you can write down your introspections in a journal and track your progress over time.

Recommended Resources for Chakra Meditation

These are some resources that can help you explore chakra meditation further.

Books

"Wheels of Life: A User's Guide to the Chakra System" by Anodea Judith
"The Chakras in Grief and Trauma" by Karla Helbert
"The Book of Chakra Healing" by Liz Simpson

Guided Meditations

YouTube
Headspace app
Insight Timer app

Classes and Workshops

Helbert recommends attending a yoga class or workshop that focuses on chakras. "Working with a meditation teacher with experience and knowledge of the chakras is also a good place to start."

With So Many Meditation Apps Out There, We've Narrowed Down Our 5 Favorites
Read More:
LIVING WELL
MINDFULNESS AND MEDITATION
3 Sources

By Sanjana Gupta
Sanjana is a health writer and editor. Her work spans various health-related topics, including mental health, fitness, nutrition, and wellness.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback