Why Are College Students So Depressed?

It may not always feel like the best four years of your life

By Kendra Cherry, MSEd Updated on September 12, 2023
 Reviewed by David Susman, PhD

Andreswd / Getty Images

Table of Contents
Symptoms of Depression in College Students
What Percentage of College Students Experience Depression?
What Really Causes Depression in College Students?
Impact of Depression on Academic and Personal Life
Coping With Depression in College
Treatments for Depression in College Students
Resources
How Schools Can Help
FAQ

Depression is one of the most common mental health conditions and affects people of all ages, including college students. It impacts thoughts, feelings, and behaviors and is characterized by persistent sadness and loss of interest in once-enjoyable activities.

This condition is prevalent on college campuses, affecting an estimated 53% of students at some point.1

"College students are a vulnerable population who are faced with a range of new and often wonderful-yet sometimes stressful-experiences," explains Randall Dwenger, MD, the chief medical officer at Mountainside Treatment Center. He also notes that people who have a predisposition to depression typically start to display symptoms during their early 20s.

Depression can take a toll on many aspects of a young person's life, including academic performance, social life, and physical health. It can also increase their risk of substance abuse and co-occurring mental health conditions.

For this reason, it is crucial to recognize the signs of depression in college students and provide tools, resources, and support that can help.

At a Glance

College students are faced with multiple stressors like living on their own for the first time, meeting new people, and taking a rigorous course load. All of these changes happen at one time and cause major stress.

Any symptoms-both mild and severe-can affect college students' performance and mental health.

Fortunately, help is available and schools have also stepped in to address mental health concerns.

Symptoms of Depression in College Students

"Even mild symptoms may significantly interfere with academic and social functioning," explains Amy Mezulis, PhD, a licensed clinical psychologist and chief clinical officer of Joon. She also notes that it can lead to symptoms such as trouble concentrating, fatigue, and low energy, which can make it tough for students to keep up with academic work.

Some students may experience frustration with themselves at not being able to keep up with the challenges of living independently: balancing academics, social life, and tasks of daily living. These frustrations turned inward may present as depression.

- RANDALL DWENGER, MD

Symptoms of depression that college students may experience include:2

Feeling sad, low, or "empty"
Loss of interest in previously enjoyed activities
Difficulty concentrating and making decisions
Missing class
Poor grades
Not having the motivation to finish assignments
Poor self-care and personal hygiene
Using drugs or alcohol to cope with difficult emotions
Irritability or restlessness
Guilt, helplessness, or hopelessness
Lack of energy or fatigue
Feelings of worthlessness
Reduced physical activity
Changes in sleep habits and appetite
Thoughts of self-harm or suicide

If you are having suicidal thoughts, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 988 for support and assistance from a trained counselor. If you or a loved one are in immediate danger, call 911.

For more mental health resources, see our National Helpline Database.

Examples

Unfortunately, it isn't easy to predict which students will excel and which will struggle with all the changes and challenges that college brings.

"Some students may experience frustration with themselves at not being able to keep up with the challenges of living independently: balancing academics, social life, and tasks of daily living. These frustrations turned inward may present as depression," Dr. Dwenger says.

In one study that involved interviewing college students about their experiences, students suggested that depression affected many academic areas, including their effort, ability to focus, and time management.3

Struggling with motivation and falling behind on academic work were common themes.

"[Depression] can definitely be a drain on focus because if I'm having a particularly bad episode, it's hard to do anything at all," one student explained.

For some students, falling behind in classes can make depression feel even worse. "Once you start falling behind, then the depression kicks in, it will make me think less of myself for that. Then it's even harder to catch up. As the things pile up, it gets more difficult to pull myself out of [the depression]," another student told researchers.

What Percentage of College Students Experience Depression?

Depression rates among U.S. college students are at an all-time high and growing. According to one internet-based survey, 44% reported that they currently have symptoms of depression, and 15% said they had considered suicide in the past year.4

A 2022 study published in the Journal of Affective Disorders examined data from the national Healthy Minds study between the years 2013 and 2021.5 The researchers found that there has been a steady, consistent decline in the mental health of college students throughout the United States, amounting to a 135% increase in depression over the course of those eight years. 

Between 2013 and 2021, the number of college students who met the diagnostic criteria for one or more mental disorders doubled.

Such numbers are sobering, but the survey also found some positive indicators; more students are participating in therapy, and fewer are turning to alcohol to cope with their mental health problems. Unfortunately, the increasing rates of depression may also be outpacing the resources that are available to treat it.

And while the COVID-19 pandemic was associated with significant increases in rates of depression,6 the survey data shows that these increases are part of a larger trend and not simply attributable to a singular pandemic-era dip in mental well-being.

For students to get the help they need, researchers, public health experts, and academic institutions need to learn more about why students are struggling with depression. By identifying the factors that play a role, they can offer better interventions and develop prevention programs to combat depression in college students.

What Really Causes Depression in College Students?

Leaving home for the first time can be an exciting but also challenging time for many students. It can be a time of self-discovery and personal growth, but it can also be stressful, anxiety-provoking, and isolating for many. 

The following are just some of the common factors that can play a role in the onset of depression among college-age students.

Transitions and Adjustments

"The transition to college can be a big change, both academically and socially," explains Laura Erickson-Schroth, MD, chief medical officer of The Jed Foundation (JED). Going to college often means leaving behind social connections and support and starting over in a new environment.

For most students, college is their first experience living away from home. Moving out, adjusting to a new environment, and forging new social connections can contribute to stress that can play a part in causing depression, Dr. Erickson-Schroth says.

Students are also dealing with a lot of pressure to perform well. This stress can affect well-being and contribute to feelings of inadequacy and helplessness.

Relationships and Social Pressures

Students also face the pressure of fitting in with their peers in a new setting. They may feel disconnected from their old friends and struggle to form new friendships in an unfamiliar environment. This lack of social support may contribute to depression.

The college years can also be a time to forge new relationships with friends and romantic partners, but this can also be a source of conflict and strife. Arguments with roommates, losing touch with old friends, and problems in romantic relationships can sometimes leave college students feeling distressed.

Financial Stress

Paying for school and managing living expenses can create additional pressures. College is the first time many young people have had to deal with this type of financial pressure, and it can create feelings of stress that can play a part in the onset of depression.

Dr. Erickson-Schroth notes that students from lower-income households experience more financial stress, including struggles related to finding stable housing, food, and healthcare.

Surveys suggest that three out of every five college students face some type of insecurity related to essential needs.7

Poor Sleep

Social activities and academic demands can contribute to poor sleep habits. Depression and sleep have a bidirectional relationship. Irregular or poor sleep habits are linked to the onset of depression, but depression can make sleeping more difficult.8 Sleep disturbances are also associated with an increased risk of suicidal ideation.9 

Research has also found that 82% of college students who experience suicidal thinking also experience sleep disturbances.10

Substance Use

Some students may experiment with alcohol and drugs in college, in some cases as a way to cope with negative emotions and stress. Unfortunately, such substance use is also associated with increased depressive symptoms.11

Other Hurdles

Dr. Erickson-Schroth notes that some young adults face additional challenges that can make them more susceptible to depression.

"Youth of color who attend college at predominantly white institutions (PWIs) often experience microaggressions and have trouble finding spaces where they feel they can be themselves," she explains.

Research also suggests that LGBTQIA+ students, financially insecure students, and lower-division students have a higher risk of experiencing more severe depression.12

Generational Challenges

The COVID-19 pandemic also played a role in fueling struggles that many college students have experienced over the past few years. Dr. Dwenger notes that the social disruptions caused by the pandemic left many students struggling without the tools, resources, and coping skills they needed to navigate what is already a tricky period in most people's lives. 

"Many experienced a sort of "whiplash" in adjusting back to in-person learning and resuming social interactions," he explains.

Unique global concerns facing today's generation of college students can also contribute to depression. This can include environmental worries, climate anxiety, political turmoil, social justice issues, and other concerns.

The political minefield, losses in terms of personal freedoms and choice, and issues of diversity may inspire some young people into action and activism, but these issues can also bring feelings of pessimism and hopelessness to many.

- RANDALL DWENGER, MD
Impact of Depression on Academic and Personal Life

The high rates of depression among college students negatively affect physical health, mental well-being, academic success, and interpersonal relationships. These effects can be distressing and far-reaching. They can also potentially interfere with a student's long-term academic and professional goals.

Academics

One of the most immediate effects of depression in college students is its effect on academic performance, attendance, and participation. Depression makes it harder to concentrate, reduces motivation to learn, and even makes it hard for students to attend class sessions.

The toll on a student's academic life can be severe. It can lead to poor test performance and bad grades, which even jeopardize a student's ability to graduate and, for those depending on academic scholarships, impair their ability to keep their form of financial support.

Declining grades and poor feedback from instructors can worsen the feelings of hopelessness and inadequacy that many students are already struggling with.

Life Outside of School

Depression also makes it more challenging for students to enjoy many of the experiences that are often associated with college. Extracurricular activities, social events, and hobbies that they used to enjoy lose their appeal. This often means that they stop participating in these activities altogether. 

Because social withdrawal is another common symptom of depression, making important connections and getting the social support they need becomes even more of a challenge. As a result, a student with depression may feel disconnected from their friends, roommates, family members, and college community.

Teenage Depression: Signs, Causes, and How to Help
Physical Health

Depression can also affect a college student's physical health. When people are depressed, they also experience increases in stress hormones such as adrenaline and cortisol. 

This stress response is associated with a variety of health effects, including impaired immunity. Periods of prolonged stress associated with depression can also elevate the risk of health problems such as autoimmune conditions, cardiovascular disease, high blood pressure, and gastrointestinal disorders.13

It is also common for people with depression to experience a variety of physical symptoms, including back pain, stomach upset, reduced psychomotor activity, and joint pain.14

Coping With Depression in College

If you are a college student struggling with depression, there are a few things that you can do that may help make it easier to cope. 

Make a Plan

Dr. Erickson-Schroth suggests proactive plans for how you'll take care of your mental health before college begins. 

"Make a list of some of the potential challenges you may face. This could include finding community, adjusting to living in a new place away from family and friends, keeping up with a different level of academic work, or getting the right amount of good nutrition, exercise, and sleep," she explains.

Once you have a list, brainstorm some ways you'll tackle these challenges. This can include checking out resources your school might offer and leaning on tactics that have worked for you in the past.

Try Behavioral Activation

Dr. Mezulis says that one of the best ways to manage depression is to use a strategy known as behavioral activation. It involves scheduling activities that help promote a positive mood and well-being, even if you might not necessarily feel in the mood.

The idea is that doing things that are good for us and that we typically enjoy will give us opportunities to feel effective, socially connected, and happy, thus improving our mood.

- AMY MEZULIS, PHD, LICENSED CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGIST

This includes scheduling things like social events, exercise, and even daily tasks like doing your laundry and homework. Start by taking stock of some of your daily habits and look for ways to schedule activities that will support your emotional well-being:

Make it a habit to go to bed and wake up at the same time each day
Eat a balanced diet
Utilize relaxation techniques to cope with stress
Start a mindfulness or meditation practice
Get regular physical activity
Seek support from family, friends, professors, advisors, and others
Treatments for Depression in College Students

While there are many strategies you can use on your own to improve your mental health and ability to cope, it is important to seek professional help if your symptoms have lasted longer than two weeks and/or are making it difficult to function in your daily life. Treatment options can include on- or off-campus options.

Talking to a mental health professional at your school's counseling center or student health services can be a great place to start. They can provide further options about mental health services that are available on-campus or refer you to off-campus providers.

Your doctor or therapist may recommend a few different options to treat your depression. Because depression is complex and influenced by a number of factors, research suggests that a combination of therapy and medication is often the most effective treatment approach.15

Therapy

During talk therapy, you can discuss the challenges you are facing with a professional. Your therapist can help you gain insights, improve relationships, and develop new coping skills.

There are different types of therapy that can help, including cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), which focuses on changing negative thoughts; interpersonal therapy (IPT), which focuses on improving relationships; and dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), which improves thoughts, emotions, and relationships.

Medication

There are also medications that can help people find relief from symptoms of depression. Antidepressants that are commonly prescribed include Prozac (fluoxetine), Paxil (paroxetine), Zoloft (sertraline), Celexa (citalopram), and Lexapro (escitalopram).

Some antidepressants carry a black box warning of an increased risk of suicide in young people under the age of 25. This risk tends to be highest when treatment is first initiated, so young people should be monitored for signs of increased suicidal thinking or behavior while taking antidepressant medication.

Resources for Professional Help

Dr. Dwenger recommends reaching out for professional support sooner rather than later. "Don't try to hide it when you find yourself falling behind or missing commitments. All colleges have Student Services that include mental health services, academic guidance, and many resources both on campus and off," he suggests.

While all colleges offer different services, you might be able to access mental health services at the following locations:

Student Support Services: Offers a range of services for academic and personal development and may provide counseling services
Counseling Center: Provides counseling services to students experiencing mental health concerns
Student Health Center: Offers a variety of health services to students, including mental health care
Psychology Clinic: Provides psychological services to students and community members

Some colleges and universities may also offer teletherapy services. Other places to turn if you are experiencing depression include your resident advisor (RA), academic advisor, a trusted professor, or campus helpline. 

While colleges and universities offer resources to combat depression, evidence suggests that around 60% of students are unaware of these options.16

How Schools Can Help

Dr. Erickson-Schroth says every college should have a comprehensive plan designed to address aspects of student mental health. Such plans should include strategies that make student mental health a priority:

Ways to promote social connections: Strategies for promoting social connections include improving student coping skills, identifying students at risk, providing mental health and crisis support, and encouraging help-seeking

Staff mental health training: Training can help higher education faculty feel empowered, informed, and knowledgeable when it comes to helping students with mental health problems
Peer training programs: These can be particularly helpful since students are more likely to turn to their peers instead of other adults.
Community-building spaces: These can help students build connections, including LGBTQIA+ centers and clubs for students of color.

You don't have to be a mental health professional to have a positive impact on your students' emotional well-being. You just need to pay attention, listen, and connect students to help if they need it.

- LAURA ERICKSON-SCHROTH, MD

Colleges and universities must offer comprehensive support for students experiencing depression. Recognizing the signs of this condition can allow students to better access resources that can help support their well-being and recovery.

Schools can help by promoting depression awareness and working to combat the stigma that might prevent students from seeking help.

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
What is the leading cause of depression in college students?

While depression does not have a single cause, stress is a common factor that plays a major role in causing depression in college students. Coping with many different new challenges, including moving away from home, juggling new responsibilities, dealing with roommates, and adjusting to all of these transitions, can be stressful for many people.

Is depression considered a disability in college?

Students who have mental health conditions such as depression may experience interruptions in their life that make it difficult to manage their normal daily needs and achieve their educational goals. If you have been diagnosed with depression or another psychiatric illness, you can request that your school make reasonable accommodations. Such accommodations may include more time to complete assignments or additional time on exams.

7 Tips for College Students With ADHD
Read More:
CONDITIONS A-Z
DEPRESSION
LIVING WITH
16 Sources

By Kendra Cherry, MSEd
Kendra Cherry, MS, is a psychosocial rehabilitation specialist, psychology educator, and author of the "Everything Psychology Book."

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback