CONDITIONS A-Z
Depression
Living With
Causes
Symptoms and Diagnosis
Treatment
Types
Childhood Depression
Suicide
 Medically reviewed by Steven Gans, MD Updated on December 07, 2023

Clinically significant depression is marked by persistent sadness, a depressed mood, diminished interest in previously enjoyable activities, and other symptoms that interfere with the ability to function in daily life.

The condition often arises from a complex combination of factors that can include genetics, family history, trauma, stress, and illness. It is one of the most common mental disorders as nearly 1 in 5 adults in the United States have been diagnosed with depression in their lifetime.1

Fortunately, effective treatments are available including medications, psychotherapy, or a combination of the two. Self-help strategies can also help people better cope with their symptoms and begin to feel better.

LIVING WITH DEPRESSION
According to a Therapist, Here's What It Means to Be Clinically Depressed
10 Ways to Support a Partner Who's Depressed
Why It May Be Hard to Sleep If You're Depressed
Can Social Media Cause Depression?
Factors That Could Increase Your Risk of Depression
These 12 Online Therapy Companies Are the Best for Treating Depression
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
How do you cope with depression?

Appropriate treatment for depression is essential, but self-help strategies can also help you feel better. Some things that can help you cope with feelings of depression include getting enough sleep, eating a healthy diet, finding social support, and engaging in regular physical activity. While depression can make these things more challenging, tackling one or two tasks each day can help improve your well-being.

Learn More: Ways to Cope When You Have Depression
How can you help someone with depression?

Some ways that you can support a friend or loved one with depression include offering support and avoiding judgment. Offer to help with tasks that your friend might be struggling with. Let them know you care, ask them what you can do to help, and encourage them to talk to their doctor. Learn more about depression so you can better understand ways you can help.

Learn More: What to Say When Someone Is Depressed
Is depression genetic?

While depression appears to have some genetic risk factors, there is no identifiable gene for depression. However, research suggests that it is the interaction of genetics and environmental factors that contribute to the condition's onset. You may have a genetic predisposition to depression, but this does not necessarily mean that you will develop the condition.

Learn More: How Genetics Factors Into Depression
Is there a cure for depression?

While there is no "cure" for depression, it is a treatable condition that can often be alleviated with the use of medications, psychotherapy, and lifestyle modifications. Antidepressants can be effective, but they often take some time to begin working. While such medications may be used alone, they are also often prescribed in conjunction with psychotherapy.

Learn More: Can Antidepressants Cure Depression?
KEY TERMS
Mood Disorder
Psychiatric Evaluation
Dysthymia
Psychosis
Seasonal Affective Disorder
Postpartum Depression
Mood Disorder

A mood disorder refers to a broad class of mental health conditions, including depression and bipolar disorder, that primarily impact emotional states. People may experience prolonged periods of a significantly depressed or sad mood, or they may have episodes of an abnormally elevated or irritable mood to an extent that it causes distress and interferes with daily living.

Is There a Test for Mental Illness?
Psychiatric Evaluation

A psychiatric evaluation is an assessment utilized by psychiatrists to diagnose mental health conditions. An evaluation often involves talking to your doctor about your symptoms, getting a physical exam, and filling out a questionnaire. This allows your doctor to gain insight into the nature and severity of your condition.

Screening Tests for Mental Illness
Dysthymia

Persistent depressive disorder (PDD), previously known as dysthymia, is a chronic state of depression. It involves symptoms such as low mood, loss of interest, sleep changes, and appetite changes that last for at least two years. Symptoms may vary in intensity over time.

What Is Persistent Depressive Disorder?
Psychosis

Psychosis is a mental state that involves losing contact with reality. People who experience psychosis may believe, see, hear, or feel things that are not real. Psychotic depression is a condition in which people experience psychotic symptoms such delusions and hallucinations alongside symptoms of depression.

What Is Psychosis?
Seasonal Affective Disorder

Seasonal affective disorder (SAD), formally known as major depressive disorder with a seasonal pattern, is a mood disorder that occurs the same time each year. People may experience feelings of depression, social withdrawal, and fatigue usually during the fall and winter. Disruptions to the normal circadian rhythm, often associated with reduced sunlight, may contribute to the condition's onset.

What Is Seasonal Affective Disorder?
Postpartum Depression

Postpartum depression, formally known as major depressive disorder with a peripartum onset, is a serious but treatable form of depression that generally occurs after giving birth. It can potentially present with psychotic features and is characterized by symptoms such as sadness, fatigue, poor sleep, trouble bonding with the baby, feelings of guilt, and intrusive thoughts.

What Is Postpartum Depression?
EXPLORE DEPRESSION
We All Get Lonely Sometimes-What to Do on the Days You Feel Totally Alone
Ask an Expert: Is It OK to Joke About My Depression?
The 8 Best Online Psychiatry Services That Take Insurance, Tried and Tested
I Tried Meditation for My Depression-Here's What I Learned
Symptoms of Treatment-Resistant Depression
What to Know About the DASS-21 Depression Anxiety Scale
What Is Compounded Grief?
6 Things People Get Wrong About Depression, From a Therapist
Causes of Treatment-Resistant Depression
Is There Rehab for Depression?
10 Reasons People Attempt Suicide Even If They Seem 'OK'
Arrival Fallacy: Will Reaching a Goal Make You Happy?
How to Talk to a Friend Who Has Lost Someone to Suicide
Is Depression a Disability?
Anhedonia: What to Do When You Can't Experience Pleasure
What Are the 5 Top Stressors in Life?
Living With Existential Depression
Living With Chronic Depression?
Can You Have 'High-Functioning' Depression?
Why You May Be Dealing With Lethargy
What Are the ICD-10 Criteria for Depression?
What to Know About the Acceptance Stage of Grief
Beck Depression Inventory: Uses, Reliability, Where to Take the Test
'What Is the Point of Life?': Why You Might Feel This Way
Unipolar Depression: Symptoms, Causes, Treatment
When Should I Call a Depression Hotline?
Major Depressive Disorder: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment
How to Switch to a New Antidepressant Safely
How to Cope With Sibling Grief
What It Means to Feel "Dead Inside"
The Psychology Behind Liminal Space
What Is Central Nervous System (CNS) Depression?
How to Cope With Regret
Why You Feel Like You Need a Hug From Someone
I Feel Lovesick: What to Do and How to Cope
What Is Birthday Depression?
How Postpartum Depression Affects Dads
Why You May Be Afraid of Success
How to Talk to Your Partner About Your Depression
What Is Agitated Depression?
What To Know About Neurontin (Gabapentin)
Symptoms of Clinical Depression
How Depression Is Diagnosed According to the DSM-5
What to Know About Childhood Depression
An Overview of the Treatments for Depression
7 Common Types of Depression
7 Facts You Should Know About Depression
National Helpline Database
Avoidant Personality Disorder: Symptoms and Treatment
Wellbutrin Withdrawal: Overview, Symptoms & Coping
I Tried It: Ketamine Meditation
How Suicidal Feelings Manifest in Young Men-Including Myself
Depression Is an Ongoing Battle-Here's What I've Learned
How I Plan to Talk to My Kids About Suicide
I Tried It: At-Home Ketamine Therapy
Matthew Johnson Is Expanding Acceptance of Psychedelics
How Tammy Baldwin Champions Mental Health in the Senate
Paige Bellenbaum Is Changing the Game for New Parents
How to Cope With Depression and Anxiety at the Same Time
Why Are College Students So Depressed?
8 Stigma Busters Shifting the Way We Think About Depression
My Partner and I Both Have Depression, Now What?
What to Do When You Want to Disappear
More In Conditions A-Z
Neurodivergence
Phobias
Anxiety
Kids' Mental Health
Addiction
ADHD
Eating Disorders
Bipolar Disorder
BPD
Neurological Disorders
PTSD
OCD
Panic Disorder
Schizophrenia
Page Sources