What to Know About Eating Disorders

Eating disorders are one of the most stigmatized mental health issues

By Lauren Muhlheim, PsyD, CEDS Updated on October 31, 2023
 Medically reviewed by Rachel Goldman, PhD, FTOS

cream_ph / Getty Images

Table of Contents
Types
Symptoms
Diagnosis
Causes
Treatment
Coping

Formally classified as "feeding and eating disorders" in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), the term "eating disorders" represents a group of complex mental health conditions that can seriously impair health and social functioning.

Because of the physical nature of their defining symptoms, eating disorders can cause both emotional distress and significant medical complications. They also have the highest mortality rate of any mental disorder.1

Watch Now: Common Signs of an Eating Disorder
History of Eating Disorders
Types of Eating Disorders

There are many types of feeding and eating disorders, and they all come with their own defining characteristics and diagnostic criteria. The eating disorders formally recognized by the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5) include the following.

Binge Eating Disorder (BED)

Binge eating disorder, the most recently recognized eating disorder, is the most common. It is characterized by repeated episodes of binge eating-defined as the consumption of a large amount of food accompanied by a feeling of loss of control. It is found in higher rates among people of larger body sizes. Weight stigma is commonly a confounding element in the development and treatment of BED.

Bulimia Nervosa (BN)

Bulimia nervosa involves recurrent episodes of binge eating followed by compensatory behaviors, or those designed to make up for the calories consumed. These behaviors may include vomiting, fasting, excessive exercise, and laxative use.

Anorexia Nervosa (AN)

Anorexia nervosa is characterized by the restricted intake of food, leading to a lower than expected body weight, fear of weight gain, and disturbance in body image. Many people are unaware that anorexia nervosa can also be diagnosed in individuals with larger bodies. Although anorexia is the eating disorder that receives the most attention, it is actually the least common.

Other Specified Feeding and Eating Disorder (OSFED)

Other specified feeding and eating disorder is a catchall category that includes a wide range of eating problems that cause significant distress and impairment but do not meet the specific criteria for anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, or binge eating disorder. OSFED and unspecified feeding or eating disorder (UFED) replaced the eating disorder not otherwise specified (EDNOS) category in previous versions of the DSM.

People diagnosed with OSFED often feel invalidated and unworthy of help, which is not true. OSFED can also be as severe as other eating disorders and include subclinical eating disorders.

Research shows that many people with subclinical eating disorders will develop full eating disorders. Subclinical eating disorders can also describe a phase that many people in recovery pass through on their way to full recovery.

Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder (ARFID)

Previously called selective eating disorder, avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID) is an eating disorder that involves a restricted food intake in the absence of the body image disturbance commonly seen in anorexia nervosa. It is manifested by persistent failure to meet appropriate nutritional and/or energy needs.

ARFID Is More Than Just Picky Eating
Orthorexia Nervosa

Orthorexia nervosa is not an official eating disorder in the DSM-5, though it has attracted a great deal of recent attention as a proposed diagnosis for future editions. It differs from other eating disorders because the unhealthy obsession does not typically come from a desire to lose weight. Further, the focus is not on food quantity but rather food quality.

Orthorexia nervosa is an unhealthy obsession with healthy eating and involves adhering to a theory of healthy eating to the point that one experiences health, social, and occupational consequences.

Other Eating Disorders

In addition to the ones listed above, other eating disorders include:

Night eating syndrome
Pica
Purging disorder
Rumination disorder
Symptoms of an Eating Disorder

Although symptoms of different eating disorders vary greatly, some may indicate a reason to investigate further. What's more, if your thoughts and/or behaviors surrounding food, weight, or body image are causing distress and impacting daily functioning, it's time to seek help.

Dietary restriction
Frequent weight changes or being significantly underweight
Negative body image
Presence of binge eating
Presence of excessive exercise
Presence of purging, laxative, or diuretic use
Excessive thoughts surrounding food, body image, and weight

It is common for people with eating disorders, especially those with anorexia nervosa, to not believe they are ill. This is called anosognosia.

Is My Loss of Appetite an Eating Disorder?
Mental Effects

Eating disorders often occur along with other mental disorders, most often anxiety disorders, including:2﻿

Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD)
Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)
​​Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
Social anxiety disorder (GAD)

Anxiety disorders usually predate the onset of an eating disorder. Often, people with eating disorders also experience depression and score high on measures of perfectionism.

Physical Effects

Because sufficient intake of nutritionally balanced foods is essential for regular functioning, eating disorders can significantly affect physical and mental operations. A person does not have to be underweight to experience the medical consequences of an eating disorder. Eating disorders affect every system of the body and can lead to physical health problems like:

Brain mass loss3
Cardiovascular problems
Gastrointestinal issues (e.g., chronic constipation, gastroesophageal reflux)
Dental problems
Disrupted sleep patterns
Fainting spells
Hair loss or downy hair all over the body (called lanugo)
Loss of menstrual period post-puberty (or delayed first period)4
Musculoskeletal injuries and pain
Weakened bones5
Diagnosis of Eating Disorders

Medical physicians or mental health professionals, including psychiatrists and psychologists, can diagnose eating disorders. Often, a pediatrician or primary care doctor will diagnose an eating disorder after noticing symptoms during a regular check-up or after a parent or family member expresses concern over their loved one's behavior.

Although there is no one laboratory test to screen for eating disorders, your doctor can use a variety of physical and psychological evaluations as well as lab tests to determine your diagnosis, including:

A physical exam, during which your provider will check your height, weight, and vital signs
Lab tests, including a complete blood count, liver, kidney, and thyroid function tests, urinalysis, X-ray, and an electrocardiogram
Psychological evaluation, which includes personal questions about your eating behaviors, binging, purging, exercise habits, and body image

There are also multiple questionnaires and assessment tools used to assess a person's symptoms, including:

Eating Disorder Inventory
SCOFF Questionnaire
Eating Attitudes Test
Eating Disorder Examination Questionnaire (EDE-Q)
Who Is Diagnosed?

Contrary to popular belief, eating disorders do not only affect teenage girls. They occur in people of all genders, ages, races, ethnicities, and socioeconomic statuses. They are, however, more commonly diagnosed in women.

Men are underrepresented in eating disorder statistics-the stigma of having a condition associated primarily with women often keeps them from seeking help and getting diagnosed. Furthermore, eating disorders may also present differently in men.

Eating disorders have been diagnosed in children as young as age 6 and in older adults and seniors. The different ways eating disorders manifest in these populations can contribute to their unrecognizable nature, even by professionals.

While eating disorders affect people of all ethnic backgrounds, they are often overlooked in non-white populations due to stereotyping. The mistaken belief that eating disorders only affect affluent white females has contributed to the lack of public health treatment for others-the only option available to many underserved and marginalized populations.

And although not well-studied, it is postulated that the experience of discrimination and oppression among transgender populations contribute to higher rates of eating and other disorders among transgender individuals.

Diagnostic Changes for Eating Disorders in the DSM-V
Causes of Eating Disorders

Eating disorders are complex illnesses. While we do not definitively know what causes them, some theories exist.

It appears that 50% to 80% of the risk for developing an eating disorder is genetic, but genes alone do not predict who will develop an eating disorder. It is often said that "genes load the gun, but environment pulls the trigger."6

Certain situations and events-often called "precipitating factors"-contribute to or trigger the development of eating disorders in those who are genetically vulnerable.

Some environmental factors implicated as precipitants include:

Abuse
Bullying
Dieting
Life transitions
Mental illness
Puberty
Stress
Weight stigma

It has also become common to blame eating disorders on the media. While media influence is recognized as a complicating factor, it isn't considered an underlying cause of eating disorder development in individuals. Ultimately, a person must also have a genetic vulnerability for eating disorders to develop.

The Different Causes of Eating Disorders
Treatment for Eating Disorders

Early intervention is associated with an improved outcome, so please do not delay seeking assistance. Life may even need to be put on hold while you focus on getting well. And once you are well, you will be in a much better position to appreciate what life has to offer. Help is available in various formats, although it is common to start treatment with the lowest level of care and progress to higher levels as needed.

Self-Help

Some people with bulimia nervosa and binge eating disorder may explore self-help or guided-self help based on cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) principles. The person may work through a workbook, manual, or web platform to learn about the disorder and develop skills to overcome and manage it. Self-help is contraindicated for anorexia nervosa.

Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT)

CBT is the best-studied outpatient therapy for adult eating disorders and includes the following elements:7﻿

Cognitive restructuring
Body image exposure
Delays and alternatives
Food exposure
Limiting body-checking
Meal planning
Regular eating
Relapse prevention
Self-monitoring via paper or applications
Family-Based Treatment (FBT)

Family-based treatment (FBT) is the best-studied treatment for children and adolescents with eating disorders.8﻿ Essentially, the family is a vital part of the treatment team. Parents commonly provide meal support, which allows the young person to recover in their home environment. Another important element of FBT is externalizing the eating disorder.

Nutritional Therapy

A registered dietitian can help you learn (or relearn) the components of a healthy diet and motivate you to make the needed changes.

Weekly Outpatient Treatment

Weekly outpatient treatment is the usual starting point for those who have access to treatment and typically includes treatment by a team of professionals, including a therapist, a dietitian, and a medical doctor. Other successful outpatient therapies for adult eating disorders include:

Dialectical behavior therapy
Cognitive remediation therapy
Interpersonal psychotherapy
Intensive Treatment

For people needing a higher level of care, treatment is available at multiple levels, including intensive outpatient, partial hospitalization, residential, and hospital levels of care. In these settings, a multidisciplinary team almost always provides treatment.

The Best Online Therapy Programs We've tried, tested and written unbiased reviews of the best online therapy programs including Talkspace, Betterhelp, and Regain.
Coping With an Eating Disorder

Caring for your physical and mental health will go a long way toward helping you cope with an eating disorder. In addition to talking to a therapist or joining a support group (like Eating Disorders Anonymous), seek support from a trusted friend or family member who can be there for you along your path to recovery.

Beyond self-care, it's also essential to identify a few healthy distractions you can turn to when you find yourself obsessing about food and weight or experiencing the urge to turn to disordered eating or behaviors. Here are a few to consider:

Explore a new hobby, like photography, painting, or knitting
Invest in an adult coloring book
Practice mindfulness meditation
Take a leisurely walk
Try a yoga class or DVD
Write in a journal
A Word From Verywell

Recovery from an eating disorder isn't easy. It takes courage, but it is possible with the right support system in place.

If you are the parent of a minor with an eating disorder, then it is wise for you to seek treatment on their behalf. Supporting a child with an eating disorder is hard work, but there are resources for you. If your loved one with an eating disorder is an adult, you can still play an important role in helping them too.

Since people with eating disorders often do not believe they have a problem. Family members and significant others play a critical role in getting them help. Although recovery from an eating disorder can be challenging and sometimes long, it is possible.

If you or a loved one are coping with an eating disorder, contact the National Eating Disorders Association (NEDA) Helpline for support at 1-800-931-2237. 

For more mental health resources, see our National Helpline Database.

Read More:
CONDITIONS A-Z
EATING DISORDERS
8 Sources

By Lauren Muhlheim, PsyD, CEDS
 Lauren Muhlheim, PsyD, is a certified eating disorders expert and clinical psychologist who provides cognitive behavioral psychotherapy. 

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback