CONDITIONS A-Z
Eating Disorders
Living With
Bulimia
Anorexia
Symptoms and Diagnosis
Treatment
 Medically reviewed by Rachel Goldman, PhD, FTOS Updated on July 19, 2024

An eating disorder is a mental health condition in which the person affected experiences significant disruptions in their eating behaviors as well as in their thoughts and emotions related to food. People who struggle with eating disorders often become preoccupied with food and their body weight. These conditions can be life-threatening if left untreated.

Additionally, eating disorders often occur together with other mental health issues like depression, anxiety, panic disorders, and obsessive-compulsive disorders. Without treatment, eating disorders can cause a number of health-related problems including cardiovascular issues, gastrointestinal issues, and malnutrition. However, with proper treatment, people affected by eating disorders can resume health eating habits and can improve their mental health.

IMPACT OF EATING DISORDERS
What to Do If Your Teen Shows Signs of Bulimia
Why Do Some People Get Eating Disorders?
How Is Anorexia Nervosa Diagnosed?
What to Know About Anorexia in Men
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Could you have an eating disorder?

Determining if you have an eating disorder begins with examining your thoughts and behaviors surrounding food, body image and body weight. Although there is an extensive list of warning signs, not everyone will display every symptom. If you suspect you have an eating disorder, it's important to talk to your doctor or a mental health professional. The chance for recovery increases the sooner an eating disorder is addressed.

Learn More: Symptoms of Eating Disorders
What causes eating disorders?

Eating disorders are complex disorders that stem from a variety of factors including genetics, cultural ideals, environmental, psychological, and biological influences. These risk factors may also include mental health conditions like anxiety and depression along with body image issues.

Learn More: Causes of Eating Disorders
How can you help someone with an eating disorder?

To help a loved one with an eating disorder, be supportive of their recovery efforts without trying to fix, control, or counsel them.1﻿ Instead, be patient and encouraging. Empower them to tackle their disordered eating and talk to a counselor or therapist.

Are eating disorders genetic?

There is some evidence that eating disorders are heritable. In fact, in one study of twins, researchers discovered that 40% to 60% of the risk for anorexia nervosa, bulimia nervosa, and binge eating disorder arises from genetic influences. However, the development of an eating disorder is a complex process impacted by a variety of factors and not just about genetic influences.

Learn More: What Causes an Eating Disorder?
KEY TERMS
Anorexia Nervosa
Bulimia Nervosa
Binge-Eating Disorder
Rumination Disorder
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
Psychological Evaluation
Family-Based Therapy
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
Anorexia Nervosa

Anorexia nervosa is an eating disorder characterized by not eating enough and impacts all areas of a person's life. A person affected by anorexia nervosa, may have a low body weight and a distorted body image. They also may have an intense fear of gaining weight and often use extreme measures to control their weight and shape.

Warning Signs of Anorexia Nervosa
Bulimia Nervosa

Bulimia nervosa is an eating disorder characterized by binge eating followed by purging or another method designed to prevent weight gain such as the use of laxatives, excessive exercises, and fasting. Due to guilt and shame associated with bulimia nervosa, people affected by this disorder will go to great lengths to hide their behaviors.

Signs and Symptoms of Bulimia Nervosa
Binge-Eating Disorder

Binge eating is an eating disorder characterized by consuming large amounts of food even when the person isn't hungry. Typically, the person feels out of control as well as a sense of shame and guilt over their binge eating. Unlike people with bulimia nervosa, they do not try to purge the food after it is consumed.

What Is Binge Eating?
Rumination Disorder

Rumination disorder is an eating disorder that involves bringing previously chewed or previously swallowed food back up in order to spit it out or re-swallow it. These behaviors are often done in secret because of a fear of what people will think.

What Is Rumination Disorder?
Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder

ARFID is an eating disorder in which the person affected has a strong preference for a narrow range of foods and may refuse to eat any food that is outside of these parameters. Unlike other eating disorders, people with ARFID do not worry about weight gain or body composition.

Understanding Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
Psychological Evaluation

During a psychological evaluation, a psychologist or therapist will use a variety of tests and assessments to measure and observe a person's thoughts and behaviors. At the completion of a psychological evaluation, the psychologist will make a diagnosis and recommend treatment options.

How Eating Disorders Are Diagnosed
Family-Based Therapy

Sometimes referred to as the Maudsley Method, family-based therapy (FBT) is the leading treatment option for treating adolescents with eating disorders. FBT involves the whole family and primarily takes place in outpatient settings. It is the fastest and most effective treatment for children, adolescents, and young adults.

Family-Based Therapy for Eating Disorders
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy

CBT is a type of treatment that focuses on helping a person learn how to identify destructive behaviors and thought processes. Through CBT, a person's thoughts and behaviors are challenged and replaced with more realistic thoughts and behaviors.

What Is Cognitive Behavioral Therapy?
EXPLORE EATING DISORDERS
Thinspo: What It Is and How It Impacts Body Image
Understanding Binge Eating and ADHD
Caring for Someone With Bulimia: What to Know
How Bulimia Nervosa Is Treated
Gastroparesis and Eating Disorders
Causes and Risk Factors of Anorexia
Dysphagia as a Symptom of Anorexia
How Anorexia Is Treated
The Difference Between Disordered Eating and Eating Disorders
What to Know About Pica
An Overview of Mental Health Statistics 
Atypical Anorexia Nervosa: Causes, Symptom, and Treatment
Body Dysmorphic Disorder and Eating Disorders
History of Eating Disorders
What to Know About Eating Disorders
Compulsive Eating vs Binge Eating: What Are The Differences?
'I Hate My Body': What to Do If You Feel This Way
What Is the Cotton Ball Diet?
The Connection Between Body Image and Eating Disorders
What Are Compensatory Behaviors in People with Eating Disorders?
Symptoms of Bulimia
Bulimia Diagnosis Requires 5 Factors
What Is Bulimia?
Caregiving for Anorexia
Coping With Anorexia
Anorexia Nervosa Recovery: Meal Plans to Restore Nutritional Health
Anosognosia and Anorexia Symptoms
ARFID Symptoms: Diagnosing Avoidant/Restrictive Food Intake Disorder
Is My Loss of Appetite an Eating Disorder?
Living With Pagophagia
Eating Disorders and Hypothalamic Amenorrhea
Signs Your Teen May Have an Eating Disorder
Identifying Purging Disorder
Understanding Bingeing and Purging
ARFID Is More Than Just Picky Eating
Understanding Chewing and Spitting in Eating Disorders
What Is Orthorexia Nervosa?
The SCOFF Questionnaire Screens for Eating Disorders
Other Specified Feeding and Eating Disorder (OSFED): What You Need to Know
Diagnostic Changes for Eating Disorders in the DSM-V
Understanding Obsessive Compulsive Disorder and Eating Disorders
Why Intervention Is Necessary to Prevent Eating Disorder Deaths
How to Help Someone With an Eating Disorder
What Medications Are Used to Treat Binge Eating?
What Is Dance Therapy?
Medications Used to Treat Eating Disorders
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) for Eating Disorders
What Is Body Checking?
How to Break Habits Related to Eating Disorders
Family-Based Treatment (FBT) for Eating Disorders
Dialectical Behavior Therapy for Eating Disorders
Hospitalization for Eating Disorders
How a Registered Dietitian Helps You With an Eating Disorder
Disordered Eating Treatments
12 Tips for Eating Disorder Recovery
Meal Planning for Eating Disorder Recovery
More In Conditions A-Z
Neurodivergence
Phobias
Anxiety
Kids' Mental Health
Addiction
ADHD
Bipolar Disorder
BPD
Depression
Neurological Disorders
PTSD
OCD
Panic Disorder
Schizophrenia
Page Sources