LIVING WELL
Understanding Emotions

While we are all wired differently, our emotions-and the ways in which we feel and respond to the world around us-make us unique. They allow us to realize what's most important to us, from the people we care about to the opinions we hold, and force us to navigate the complexities of everyday life. They may also give us a glimpse into patterns stemming from our childhood experiences.

Learn where emotions originate, how they affect our lives and behaviors, and why they manifest in the ways that they do.

The 6 Types of Basic Emotions and Their Effect on Human Behavior
Emotions and Types of Emotional Responses
The Important Role of Emotions
Healthy Coping Skills for Uncomfortable Emotions
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
How many emotions are there?

While it was previously identified that there are six basic emotions-happiness, sadness, fear, disgust, anger, and surprise-that are universally experienced in all human cultures, researchers have now found that there are 27 different categories of emotions.

Learn More: An Overview of the 6 Types of Basic Emotions
What causes emotions?

Emotions are influenced by a network of interconnected structures in the brain that make up what is known as the limbic system. Key structures including the hypothalamus, the hippocampus, the amygdala, and the limbic cortex play a pivotal role in emotions and behavioral responses.

Learn More: Why Emotions Are Important
Can we control our emotions?

As human beings, we have the ability to self-regulate, or manage our thoughts, behaviors, and emotions-allowing us to better handle stress, deal with conflict, and accomplish our goals. We can continue to develop our self-regulation skills through mindfulness strategies and exercises.

Learn More: How to Develop and Practice Self-Regulation
KEY TERMS
Emotional Intelligence
Emotion Wheel
Expression
Mood
Emotional Intelligence

Emotional intelligence (EI) refers to the ability to perceive, control, and evaluate emotions. Some researchers suggest that emotional intelligence can be learned and strengthened, while others claim it's an inborn characteristic.

What Is Emotional Intelligence?
Emotion Wheel

The emotion wheel is an emotion classification system introduced by psychologist Robert Plutchik in the 1980s. The model allowed us to label our feelings, so we can develop our emotional literacy skills to have a greater awareness of ourselves and the emotions of others.

Self-Awareness Development and Types
Expression

Expression is the act of communicating our thoughts and emotions with others, verbally or non-verbally.

Why Expressing Feelings With Your Partner Is Worth the Emotional Risk
Mood

Mood can be defined as a relatively stable affective state that is often described as positive or negative. Unlike emotions, which tend to be stronger and more specific, moods are more general and less intense. 

What Is Mood?
EXPLORE UNDERSTANDING EMOTIONS
6 Signs You Should Consider Calling Off the Wedding, According to a Relationship Coach
"Is Everyone Looking At My Skin?" How I Was Blindsided By Adult Eczema
Wait, Did I Just Get Scammed? The Emotional Rollercoaster Before Recovery
What Happens in Your Brain When You're Hangry?
Is It Better to Be Kind or Nice?
What Happens in Your Brain When You're Angry, According to Psychology
9 Subtle Ways You Seem Insecure Without Realizing It
Why We're Drawn to Shows We Hate, According to Psychology
This Is What Happens to the Brain & Body When You're Heartbroken
Experts Reveal the One Key Difference Between Joy and Happiness
The Science of Happy Hormones: How to Enhance Your Mental Well-being
"I Lost Weight, But I Don't Feel Like Myself Anymore"
The Double-Edged Sword of Being Treated Differently After Losing the Weight
Why "Happiness Is a Choice" Is a BS Concept
Feeling Embarrassed Is the Worst-Here's How to Overcome It Quickly
8 Signs You Were Raised By Emotionally Immature Parents (and How to Heal)
How Strong Is Your Emotional Literacy?
Falling in Love Is a Feeling That's Hard to Describe-These 25 Quotes Come Pretty Close
You Might Have Emophilia If You Fall in Love Too Quickly
Toxic Shame: What It Is and How to Manage It
'Are You OK?' 14 Ways to Tell Someone You're Not, According to a Therapist
How a Duchenne Smile Signals Genuine Positivity
Emotional Contagion: Can Emotions Really Be Infectious?
How to Develop Your Sense of Emotional Permanence
How to Recognize Emotional Blackmail and Protect Yourself
How to Navigate the Storm of Emotional Flooding
Understanding and Managing Anguish: What You Need to Know
Alexithymia Might Be the Reason It's Hard to Label Your Emotions
How to Control Your Emotions When They're Running High
Psychological Flexibility
Estrogen's Impact on Women's Mental Health, According to a Doctor
Understanding Dismissive Behavior and Why It Happens
Why Feeling Jealous of Your Child May Be More Common Than You Think
The Role of the Amygdala in Human Behavior and Emotion
Are You an Empath? Take the Quiz
Compassion Fatigue: The Toll of Caring Too Much
Counterfactual Thinking: Why We Dwell on What Could Have Been
How Emotionally Intelligent Are You?
Are You an Optimist or a Pessimist?
How to Be Less Insecure
Which Human Emotion Are You? Take the Quiz
Happy Crying: Why Does It Happen?
Emotion Wheel: What It Is and How to Use One
Why Am I So Emotional: 6 Reasons You Feel This Way
When You Don't Want to Live-But You Don't Want to Die
Best Mood Tracker Apps
Why Do I Cry When I Get Mad?
How to Deal With the Death of a Mother
The Dangers of Bottling Up Our Emotions
9 Signs You Are Being Guilt Tripped and How to Protect Yourself
How to Embrace Radical Acceptance
Identifying and Overcoming Emotional Detachment
What Is an Empath and How Do You Know If You Are One?
How to Deal With Dysregulation
The Best Online Divorce Support Groups and Resources of 2024
Displacement in Psychology
Inappropriate Affect Explained: What It Means and Why It Happens
Amygdala Hijack and the Fight or Flight Response
Understanding the Cannon-Bard Theory of Emotion
What Is Narcissistic Rage?
What to Do When You Feel Like Running Away
Avoid Making Big Decisions After Experiencing a Death
When Is Extreme Happiness a Sign of Something Deeper?
More In Living Well
Sleep and Dreaming
Race and Social Justice
Gender Identity
Sexual Identity
Self-Improvement
Stress Management
Relationships
Mindfulness and Meditation