What Type of Friend Are You? Take This Quiz to Find Out

See which friend profile matches you best

By Sanjana Gupta Published on June 28, 2024

Anchiy / E+ / Getty Images

Table of Contents
The Friendship Quiz
Who Is This Quiz For?
The Different Types of Friends
Why It's Important to Know What Kind of Friend You Are

Have you ever wondered what kind of friend you are in your circle? We all play different roles in our relationships with others and sometimes it's fun to think about how our friends see us.

Understanding your role as a friend profoundly influences the dynamics of your friendships, says Ashley Peña, LCSW, National Executive Director of Outpatient Services at AMFM Healthcare.

That's why we've created this free quiz-take it to find out what kind of friend you are.

The Friendship Quiz

This friendship quiz can help you figure out the type of friend you are.

If more than one answer resonates with you, that's perfectly fine-just select the answer that reflects the most likely scenario.

Who Is This Quiz For?

Ever wondered why your friends keep you around? This quiz can help you understand your strengths as a friend. If you're doing some self-reflection around your relationships, it can help you understand your role in your friends' lives. In fact, research shows us that being more self-aware can help improve the quality of our relationships.1

Understanding your role as a friend profoundly influences the dynamics of your friendships.

- ASHLEY PEÑA, LCSW
The Different Types of Friends

These are some of the different types of friendship roles that you might play:

The planner: Corralling a big group can be complicated. With a mix of personalities, interests, and tastes, it's never easy to get everyone in the same place at the same time for a gathering that everyone will enjoy. That's why every group of friends needs an expert organizer who knows how to keep everything on track.
The supportive listener: In any group of friends, it's inevitable that there will be difficult times at one point or another. From heartbreak to turmoil in the group and everything in between, there is a constant need for that friend with an empathetic nature to help navigate all the ups and down of life. The supportive friend is always there when you need them the most, sometimes even at the expense of their own happiness.
The comic relief: Every group has a goofball-the friend who is always ready with a joke or a funny memory to lighten the mood. In good times and bad, this friend can always be relied on to put a smile on everyone's face.
The life of the party: A strong group of friends will often be able to keep each other energized and have fun even when you're just staying in for the night. But sometimes we could use a little extra push from the extrovert in the group who is always working to make sure everyone is having fun.
50 Deep Questions to Ask Your Friends for Juicy Conversations
Why It's Important to Know What Kind of Friend You Are

Understanding what kind of friend you are can be helpful in several ways:

Strengthens your friendships: By reflecting on your strengths and weaknesses as a friend, you can identify areas where you can improve the way you connect with your friends.
Helps you form new connections: Knowing your personality, communication style, and what you value in friendships can help you seek out people who are on your wavelength. In fact, research shows us that people with similar personalities tend to get along better as friends,2 so being more aware of your personality can help you connect with like-minded people.
Improves self-awareness: Understanding how you show up in friendships can reveal aspects of your personality you might not have noticed before. This self-awareness can benefit all areas of your life, not just friendships.
Boosts confidence: Knowing your strengths as a friend can be a confidence booster because it allows you to recognize the value you bring to friendships.

Friendship, like any relationship, requires mutual effort and understanding between people. Being aware of how you contribute strengthens the bond and fosters openness and connection.

- ASHLEY PEÑA, LCSW
6 Benefits of Friendship and Why It's So Important to Stay Close
Read More:
LIVING WELL
RELATIONSHIPS
2 Sources

By Sanjana Gupta
Sanjana is a health writer and editor. Her work spans various health-related topics, including mental health, fitness, nutrition, and wellness.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback