Why Alone Time Could Be Key to Improving Your Mental Health

Here's why solitude can be self-care

By Kendra Cherry, MSEd Updated on February 13, 2025
 Medically reviewed by Steven Gans, MD

Verywell / Madelyn Goodnight

Table of Contents
Benefits
Challenges
Personality and Alone Time
Aloneness vs. Loneliness
Signs You Need It
Ways to Get It
Getting Others to Respect It
Overcoming Fear of Alone Time

If the idea of being alone makes you wince, then, ironically, you're not alone. We're social creatures, and most of us crave relationships, intimacy, and closeness. Research has even shown that social connections are vital for emotional and physical well-being. But sometimes, alone time, aka private or solitary time, can also be important. 

Spending time by yourself, at least sometimes, can play a positive role in mental health. It can also foster self-reflection and personal growth.

Let's face it: being around other people comes with rewards, but it also creates stress. You might worry about what people think or alter your behavior to avoid rejection and fit in with the group. Consider it the cost of being part of a social world. Such challenges demonstrate why alone time can be so important.

Benefits of Alone Time

Keeping yourself company doesn't have to be a lonely experience. When you have time for yourself, you get the chance to break free from social pressures and tap into your own thoughts, feelings, and experiences. Finding time to be alone can also have several key benefits. Some of these include:

Improved personal exploration
Increased creativity
More social energy
Improved Personal Exploration

Becoming comfortable in your own company can give you the time and freedom to truly explore your own passions without interference. It can be a way to explore new things, research topics that interest you, gain knowledge, and even practice new forms of self-expression.

Taking some time for yourself allows you to explore these aspects free from the pressures and judgments of others. Having time to yourself is critical for growth and personal development. Instead of worrying about the needs, interests, and opinions that others may have, alone time lets you focus on yourself.

Increased Creativity

Alone time is an opportunity to let your mind wander and strengthen your creativity. Without the need to care for or interact with other people, you can ignore outside influences and focus inward.

Research actually suggests that being alone can lead to changes in the brain that help fuel the creative process. One study found that people who tend to purposely withdraw in order to spend time alone also tend to be highly creative people.1

In a 2020 study published in the journal Nature Communications, researchers found that perceived social isolation (a.k.a. loneliness) led to increased activity in the neural circuits related to imagination. When left with a lack of social stimulation, the brain ramps up its creative networks to help fill the void.2

More Social Energy

Living alone is often portrayed in a negative light. However, researchers have found that people who live alone may actually have richer social lives and more social energy than people who cohabitate with others.

In his book "Going Solo," sociologist Eric Klineberg notes that one in seven U.S. adults lives alone. Klineberg found that not only were these adults *not* lonely, many actually had richer social lives.3

The COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated both the challenges of loneliness and a lack of solitary time. While many people struggled with feelings of isolation and loneliness, others faced the challenges of suddenly spending an almost overwhelming amount of time in close quarters with family members or roommates. Blurred work-life boundaries and a lack of time apart meant that many people were suddenly struggling with a complete lack of alone time.

Reasons Why Alone Time Isn't Always Easy

If alone time benefits us, why do so many people view it as a worrisome or frightening experience? Solitude can be challenging for some people for a variety of reasons. Some research found that many people would prefer to give themselves painful electric shocks rather than sit alone with their own thoughts.4

Some of these reasons people might struggle with being alone include:

Lack of experience being alone: Some people might not be used to being alone because they are so accustomed to being around other people. The sudden absence of social stimulation can leave them feeling detached or disconnected. 
Distressing thoughts and feelings: In other cases, being alone and focusing inward can be difficult or even painful. People might find this introspection distressing or engaging in rumination and worry.
Social stigma: Stigma about being alone can also shape how people feel about solitude. For those who have been exposed to negative attitudes towards being alone or who see it as a form of antisocial behavior or social rejection, solitude can seem like a painful form of punishment.

Unfortunately, these negative perceptions can take a toll on the way we spend our time alone. Marketing professor and researcher Rebecca Ratner of the University of Maryland found that people often avoid doing things they enjoy if they have to do them alone.5 This is particularly true if it is an activity that others can observe, such as going to dinner or a movie solo.

Such findings suggest that a stigma about being alone influences whether people think they enjoy such activities. "When people do things alone, they enjoy themselves more than they expected," Ratner explains. "People overestimate the benefits of being with someone else."6

How Personality Affects the Need for Alone Time

It is also important to note that aspects of your personality, as well as your individual preferences, can play a role in determining how much alone time you need and how beneficial it may be. Extroverts tend to feel energized by social experiences, for example, which means that solitude might be more challenging for them. Introverts, on the other hand, gain energy from being alone.

However, don't think that just because you are an extrovert you won't enjoy spending time by yourself. In one study, social psychologist Thuy-vy Thi Nguyen found that introverts and extroverts didn't actually differ in how much enjoyment they gained from solitude.7

In other words, contrary to popular belief, introverts don't enjoy solitude any more than extroverts.

"Our findings suggested that individuals who stay true to their choices and convictions are more likely to take interest and see value in spending time with themselves, despite their propensities for sociality or insecurity around other people," the authors explain.

The bottom line is that no matter what your personality type, there may be times you can benefit from some quality time to yourself.

Aloneness vs. Loneliness

Even before the global pandemic, experts warned that a loneliness epidemic was threatening the wellness of people of all ages. Research suggests that people experience more loneliness now than they have in the past. According to one 2018 report, half of Americans feel lonely sometimes, while 25% report feeling lonely almost all the time.8

There is an abundance of evidence showing that loneliness can have devastating health consequences. It has been linked to elevated blood pressure, hastened cognitive decline, social anxiety, and an increased risk for Alzheimer's disease.

Loneliness is linked to a wide range of negative health consequences, including a higher risk for depression, anxiety, obesity, high blood pressure, and early death.9

But it is important to remember that being alone doesn't equal loneliness. Where loneliness is marked by negative feelings associated with isolation, alone time involves finding freedom, inspiration, and rejuvenation in solitude. 

More recently, researchers have begun to explore the idea that a certain amount of quality alone time can be just as vital for emotional and physical wellness.

Signs You Need Some Alone Time

Recognizing when you need time away from others isn't always easy. We tend to get so caught up in life and all of our obligations that we lose sight of the need to take a break and find time for ourselves. Some signs to watch for include:

Feeling short-tempered
Getting easily irritated by sometimes minor things 
Losing interest in doing things with other people
Feeling overwhelmed or overstimulated 
Having trouble concentrating
Getting anxious about spending time with other people

The good news is that even if you are struggling with any of these signs, a little alone time can have a significant restorative effect. In one study, people who reported spending approximately 11% of their time alone experienced fewer negative feelings in subsequent demanding social experiences.10

Ways to Get Your Alone Time

If you're craving some time to yourself, it is crucial to do so in ways that support your mental well-being. Being alone is most beneficial when it is voluntary. Feeling like you can return to your social world whenever you like is also essential.

Pick a time: Figure out when you'd like to spend time alone. Plan that time into your schedule and make sure that other people know that they shouldn't interrupt you during that time.
Turn off social media: Work on eliminating distractions, particularly ones that invite social comparisons. Your focus should be on your own thoughts and interests and not on what other people are doing.11
Plan something: Not everyone is comfortable spending time alone, so you might find it helpful to plan out what you want to do. This might involve some relaxation time, exploring a favorite hobby, or reading a book.
Take a walk: Evidence suggests that being outside can have a beneficial impact on well-being.12 If you're feeling cooped up and stifled by too much social interaction, spending a little time outdoors alone can provide a much-needed change of scenery that can have a restorative effect.

Think about things that you might like to do by yourself, then start doing them alone.

How Much Alone Time Is Healthy?

Each person has differing needs for solitude and social time. Some might need just a few minutes now and then to reset a bad mood, while others might require more extensive stretches of alone time. Try finding a balance between the two that works for your unique needs.

Getting Others to Respect Your Alone Time

Finding time to be alone isn't always easy. Those around you may have different social needs and may not understand your need for solitude. Family obligations and parenting responsibilities can also make it tough to carve out time for yourself.

Not only does it make it hard to actually take time for yourself, constant demands from others can make you feel guilty or ashamed of focusing on your own needs.

Some steps that you can't take to ensure that you get the time you need:

Be clear: Tell the people around you, whether they are roommates, family members, or your partner, that you need time alone. 
Be specific: Let people know what this means. For example, you might say that you need a certain amount of uninterrupted time to read a book, watch a television show, or listen to a podcast.
Return the favor: If people are willing to take steps to ensure that you get some alone time, it is important for you to show them the same consideration. Offer to take on some responsibilities while they have some space to themselves.
Be flexible: If you are trying to find time for yourself when you don't live alone or you live in close quarters with other people, you'll probably need to be flexible and look for opportunities to carve out time for yourself.

Tips

Try waking up early in the morning to enjoy some peaceful time to yourself before others in the house start to wake. If that isn't an option, doing things like going for a walk outdoors or having other family members watch the kids or take over household duties while you take a break can be helpful.

Tips to Overcome a Fear of Alone Time

If the thought of being alone makes you fear you'll feel lonely, research suggests that reframing time spent alone as solitude may be helpful. In one study, participants were assigned to read about the prevalence of loneliness, a passage about the benefits of solitude, or an unrelated topic.13

After completing this reading, the participants sat alone for 10 minutes. In each condition, people experienced decreases in both negative and positive feelings. Such results suggest that while being alone might not always boost your mood, it can help you better regulate your emotions. 

The study also found that while people who read about the benefits of solitude didn't necessarily experience a better mood, they didn't experience the same reduction of positive feelings as those in the other two groups.

Such findings suggest that reassessing how you look at spending time alone can play an important role in moderating the potentially negative effects of loneliness.

Takeaways

While being alone sometimes gets mistaken for loneliness, having time to yourself now and then is important for mental health and well-being. If the thought of spending time alone makes you feel bored or uncomfortable, try starting with a small chunk of time that allows you to focus on a specific task.

As you get better at enjoying your own company, you may find that this alone time helps you feel renewed and inspired for when you do return to your social circle.

18 Things to Do on Your Birthday When You're Alone
Read More:
LIVING WELL
SELF-IMPROVEMENT
13 Sources

By Kendra Cherry, MSEd
Kendra Cherry, MS, is a psychosocial rehabilitation specialist, psychology educator, and author of the "Everything Psychology Book."

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback