CONDITIONS A-Z
Kids' Mental Health

Research shows that our behaviors and self-image can largely be attributed to our upbringing and childhood. It goes to show how mental health is an essential part of our overall health at every stage of life, including the early ones.

Whether you are looking for tips on how to help your child express the "not-so-good" emotions or support your teen as they navigate growing pains and social stressors, there are plenty of resources available for the whole family.

Mental Health Days Help Kids, But Systemic Barriers Prevent Widespread Use
These Are the US States Allowing Student Mental Health Days
Why You Should Tell Your Kids If You're Seeing a Therapist
The Best Self-Help Books for Women, According to a Mental Health Counselor
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
When should I worry about my child's mental health?

Most parents know in their gut when something isn't right with their kids, but sometimes the signs can be hard to pinpoint. Not only that but signs and symptoms can vary according to how old your child is and what their personality is like.

Some signs of mental health struggles in younger kids may include increased tantrums, moodiness, and behavioral problems. Some signs of mental health struggles in adolescents may include: sleep changes (e.g., sleeping more than usual or hardly at all), withdrawal from activities they previously enjoyed, and increased engagement in risky activities.

Learn More: How to Teach Your Kids to Let You Know When They're Struggling
What are the most common mental disorders in childhood?

According to the CDC, ADHD, anxiety problems, behavior problems, and depression are the most commonly diagnosed mental disorders in children.1

Learn More: Conditions That Can Produce ADHD-Like Characteristics
How can I help my child with mental illness?

Besides having honest talks with your child and creating a general atmosphere of trust around difficult emotions, there are some actions and preventative measures you should take as you notice mental health concerns emerging in your child:

Reach out to your child's pediatrician; they can help you understand your child's symptoms, and what further actions need to be taken. Do not wait to schedule an appointment if your child appears to be in a crisis.
You can also consider sharing your concerns with your child's teacher or a school psychologist
If your child is reluctant to leave the house or feels more comfortable at home, they might prefer a telehealth appointment with a mental health professional.

Learn More: Parents Think Teens Won't Admit Mental Health Struggles, Poll Shows
When should I screen my child for a mental health condition?

The U.S. Preventive Service Task Force officially recommends screening for some mental health conditions starting at age 8 and for depression starting at age 12. Because of the prevalence and availability of information, today's youth have access to information about mental health from an early age but might lack the understanding and communication skills to express their experiences to adults without help. 

Learn More: Anxiety and Depression Screenings: The Need for Earlier Intervention
EXPLORE KIDS' MENTAL HEALTH
How to Support a Child With Disruptive Mood Dysregulation Disorder (DMDD)
These 70+ Mental Health Coping Skills Will Help Your Kids Thrive
The Impact of Parental Alienation on Children and Families
Gifted Kid Burnout Is Real-How to Spot the Signs and Overcome It
If Your Child Gets Stranger Anxiety, These Strategies Could Help
Social Media Is Literally Harming Our Youth-How Can We Help?
What to Know About Raising Neurodivergent Kids
Parenting Style Quiz: What's Your Parenting Style?
9 in 10 Teachers Need More Resources to Care for Students' Mental Health
Nacho Parenting: What It Is, Will It Work for You?
How Snowplow Parenting Impacts Kids, According to a Psychologist
Is Middle Child Syndrome Real?
Ruling Out Conditions for a Mental Health Diagnosis in Teens
What Is Reactive Attachment Disorder?
Can Kids Learn From TV and Movies?
Types of Childhood Mood Disorders
Signs of Adjustment Disorder in Children
Conduct Disorder: Symptoms, Causes, Treatment
How to Help Teens Who Cut Themselves
Overview of Youth At-Risk Behavior
What Is a Group Home?
Transporting Troubled Teens Into a Treatment Program
Runaway Shelters for Youth
How to Choose the Best Treatment Program for a Teen
Support Groups for Parents of Troubled Teens
Oppositional Defiant Disorder: Definition, Symptoms, Traits, Causes, Treatment
7 Common Reasons Why People Bully
How Poverty During Childhood Impacts the Adult Brain
Developmental Disabilities: Types, Causes, Coping
The Benefits of Mindful Parenting
How Neglect Can Impact Your Health
The Role of Sleep in Kids' Mental Health
The Role of Sleep in Teen Mental Health
Honest Adoption Language vs. Positive Adoption Language
What Is Parentification?
Signs of Trauma in Children
5 Signs Your Child's Behavior Is Out of Control
How to Help a Child With Anxiety
Types of Behavioral Disorders in Children
What Is the Parenting Stress Index?
What to Know About Pediatric Psychiatry
What Is Nonverbal Learning Disability (NVLD)?
What Is the Storm and Stress View of Adolescence?
Thinking Outside the Classroom: The Benefits Of Outdoor Learning
Types of Speech Impediments
A Verywell Report: Parents Have Increasing Concerns About Kids' Mental Health
Should Your Child Be In Therapy?
7 Organizations Tackling The Youth Mental Health Crisis
Magnifying Voices That Need to Be Heard With Dr. Alfiee Breland-Noble
When Your Child Comes Out As LGBTQIA+: Understanding, Supporting, Affirming
More In Conditions A-Z
Neurodivergence
Phobias
Anxiety
Addiction
ADHD
Eating Disorders
Bipolar Disorder
BPD
Depression
Neurological Disorders
PTSD
OCD
Panic Disorder
Schizophrenia
Page Sources