Is Relationship Anxiety Hurting Your Love Life? Here's How to Overcome It

Give love a chance

By Elizabeth Plumptre Updated on February 12, 2025
 Reviewed by Carly Snyder, MD
 Fact checked by Karen Cilli

PhotoAlto/Laurence Mouton / Getty Images

Table of Contents
Causes
Signs
Effects
Overcoming Relationship Anxiety

Picture this: it's the start of what could be a perfect relationship. The conversation is fantastic, communication is loud and clear both ways, and everything seems set for a happily ever after-except for one or more doubts you can't seem to shake off: What do they even see in me? Will they get bored? How long until *this* one falls apart? In some cases, these questions linger even after 'I love yous' have been exchanged in the relationship.

If you've ever found yourself asking these questions, there is a chance that you may be familiar with relationship anxiety. Relationship anxiety refers to feelings of doubt, insecurity, nonstop worry, and a need for constant reassurance that sometimes occurs during a relationship. Such anxiety may have roots in early childhood attachments and is often a sign of an insecure attachment style.

Feeling anxious about life with a current or prospective partner is an understandable worry-this is a big step in life! However, in certain cases, this worry becomes so crippling, it can prevent the relationship from flourishing, or even taking off, to begin with.

"If you're not used to feeling secure in relationships - even from or especially from childhood, with your parents or caregivers - that insecurity can compound in your adult life," explains Hannah Owens, LMSW. "It might not seem intuitive to practice questioning that anxiety, but that's exactly how you identify it and can begin to do away with it."

Why Am I Always Worried My Partner Will Leave Me?

When worries start to creep in and become a familiar feature of a budding or current relationship, we might be dealing with relationship anxiety. Here are some common causes.

An Anxious Attachment Style

When we constantly question the security of our relationship or the depth of feelings our partner has for us, this can sometimes be traced back to the relationship we shared with our parents or other caregivers when growing up.

In cases where parents or guardians consistently show a child love and affection, this can form a secure attachment style to these relationships.

However, where the child is shown love and care on some occasions, but cruelty and abandonment on others, they may form an anxious attachment with the people they love and trust.

This can cause the child to cling to these beloved figures for attention. The child may also require the constant assurance of their love-traits that may appear in later years within romantic relationships.

People with anxious attachment styles often question their worth and are typically on guard, watching for the first signs that their partners may be losing interest in them. In addition, this attachment places them in a state of worry over losing their significant others.1

Negative Past Experiences

Imagine a scenario where you get stung by a bee. Hearing a buzz anytime after that may produce a certain amount of fear that causes you to be wary of getting stung again. The same can sometimes occur with relationships.

If we've experienced a relationship where our self-worth, value, attractiveness, etc., was called into question, partnering with another person can trigger the same anxiety that came up for us in the past.

If this happens, we may remain on edge, constantly questioning the stability of the relationship and the feelings involved in it.

It might not seem intuitive to practice questioning that anxiety, but that's exactly how you identify it and can begin to do away with it.

- HANNAH OWENS, LMSW
Low Self-Esteem

Living with a poor estimation of our self-worth and value can strongly affect our quality of life.2

In cases where we struggle with low self-esteem, this can raise constant doubt about the authenticity of a partner's feelings for us or whether we are deserving of our partner's love. It may also encourage assumptions of unfaithfulness and other questions that can put the future of the relationship in jeopardy.

Poor Communication

In some cases, experiencing worry about our partner's affection or the future of our relationship may be tied to the fact that honest conversations about shared feelings, the state of the relationship, or plans together are lacking.

Failing to speak on these matters can leave a vacuum in the relationship, encouraging feelings of anxiety.

How to Express Your Feelings Better
What Does Anxiety in a Relationship Feel Like?

Here are some signs that anxiety may be manifesting itself in your relationship:

Wondering if your partner truly has feelings for you
Looking for constant reassurance from your partner
Aiming to please your significant other at any cost, sometimes to your detriment
Acting controlling towards your partner's movements or interactions
Consistently wanting to be around your partner and being clingy in most situations
Holding doubts about romantic compatibility 
Over-analyzing simple words and actions for signs of trouble
Constantly feeling like your partner intends to call off the relationship
Spending more time worrying about the relationship than enjoying it

In other cases, relationship anxiety may take the form of deliberately sabotaging things with your partner. This can be seen where slight issues are blown out of proportion or where traps are laid for your partner to test fidelity.

It may also appear in instances where you purposely stay aloof and guarded with your partner, all to steel yourself against hurt and pre-empt difficulties.

Effects of Relationship Anxiety

Before placing a magnifying glass on how you act within your relationship, it's important to note that not every demonstration of worry is a sign of relationship anxiety.

In fact, taking stock of what is working, changes in communication, and feelings shared within the relationship are healthy and encouraged. However, when the energy you expend in keeping tabs on your partner and their attitude within the relationship constantly leaves you feeling on edge, that could be problematic.

Constantly worrying about the relationship can also affect the quality of love and intimacy you enjoy. In some cases, experiencing persistent feelings of anxiety within the relationship can produce the most feared result-an end to the union.

If you realize that you frequently experience relationship anxiety, this can negatively affect your well-being and the chances of experiencing a future with your partner.

However, you should know that there are steps you can take to improve the quality of your life and your relationship to avoid the harmful effects of anxiety.

Where to Meet People When You Have Dating Anxiety
So, How Do You Stop Relationship Anxiety?

Fortunately, if you're having relationship anxiety, there are ways to help cope with-or even stop-those feelings. Here are a few options to consider.

Communicate Your Feelings

To get ahead of anxiety, it's important to have honest conversations with your partner about your worries, expectations, or dreams for the future.

Share doubts you may have and talk through challenges. This will always beat making up scenarios where only the worst outcomes are imagined. 

By speaking clearly with your partner, uncertainties that can encourage anxiety are avoided, leaving room for a healthy appreciation of the relationship.

Enjoy the Present

When you catch your mind starting to wonder about the fate of your relationship in years to come, it is always advisable to nip that in the bud and enjoy the present moment.

Considering whether or not your partner will even be in your life in five years, or if they'll still find you desirable in months to come, only takes away from cherishing your current joy. Instead, it saddles you with worry over future events that may not even occur.

To manage your anxieties, treasure your current reality, and savor the happiness of being with a person you have chosen and who has also chosen to be with you at the moment.

Confront Your Anxiety

It may sound counterproductive to embrace your anxieties while attempting to get over them, but this is one of the most effective ways to get your emotions under control.

Are you anxious because of a past failed relationship? Perhaps you worry about not being good enough for love because you struggle with how you view yourself.

Questioning the reasons for your anxiety in relationships can help you recognize these issues and tackle them clearly.

Attend Therapy

In certain situations, getting professional help to manage your anxiety may be the best option for getting it under control.

Through therapy, you can receive the proper guidance to change negative and dysfunctional thoughts about yourself, your self-worth, and your attitude towards your partner.

Therapy can also teach appropriate methods to manage your anxiety to prevent lasting damage to the relationship.

The Difference Between Normal Anxiety and GAD
Keep in Mind

When we care very deeply about something, it's understandable to worry about it from time to time-relationships are no different.

However, while concerns about our partners and their feelings towards us are valid, this can quickly become unhealthy and injure our personal health. This is especially seen when we constantly obsess about who our partner is speaking with, whether the relationship will stand the test of time, and other signs of relationship anxiety.

Thankfully, there are ways to get anxiety in a relationship under control, and one of the most potent forms is simply communicating worries, challenges, hopes, etc., truthfully with our partners.

You may also bravely face the reasons you experience relationship fears. However, if additional help is required to get things under control, therapy can help change negative thinking and ideas of self-worth.3

How to Know If You Are in a Healthy Relationship
Read More:
LIVING WELL
RELATIONSHIPS
STRENGTHENING RELATIONSHIPS
3 Sources

By Elizabeth Plumptre
Elizabeth is a freelance health and wellness writer. She helps brands craft factual, yet relatable content that resonates with diverse audiences.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback