7 Ways Your Makeup Routine Is Actually Helpful for Depression

The power of makeup goes beyond skin deep

By Noma Nazish Updated on March 06, 2025
 Fact checked by Andria Park Huynh

Hugo Abad / Getty Images

Table of Contents
The Psychological Benefits of a Makeup Routine
Social and Emotional Benefits
Mindfulness and Focus
Incorporating Makeup Into Your Day

A swipe of liner. A wash of lipstick. A flick of mascara. For some, makeup is just makeup. But for others, it can be a powerful form of self-care and self-expression that increases confidence and supports a healthy sense of self. Especially at times when that sense of self feels fragile and elusive, as is often the case with depression.

Depression has a way of numbing our senses and emotions. On days when things feel too hard or overwhelming, the sensory act of putting on makeup can offer a brief respite by grounding us in the present moment and disrupting the negative feedback loop. 

A randomized controlled study1 published in the Dermatology and Therapy journal found that persistent and frequent use of makeup may help reduce depressive symptoms and improve self-image perception over time. 

Ahead, find out exactly how makeup can help spruce up not just the way we look but the way we feel, too. 

The Psychological Benefits of a Makeup Routine

First things first, a makeup routine shouldn't be considered a replacement for professional treatment. That said, it may help manage the symptoms. Here's how:

Sense of Control

Depression and anxiety often come with a sense of helplessness. Engaging in a structured, predictable ritual, like a makeup routine, offers a sense of stability when life feels chaotic, says Stephanie Boucher, MC, RP, a registered psychotherapist specializing in depression, anxiety, and trauma. 

It also provides a sense of agency by offering a small but tangible way to regain control of your day, adds Dr. Mikki Lee Elembaby, a Manhattan-based clinical psychologist.

Boosting Self-Esteem

Self-care routines like this "put us back in touch with our desire to look good and feel good," says Jillian Amodio, LMSW.

When we tend to our mind and body with deliberate focus, rooted in love and appreciation, it sends a powerful message to the brain: "I matter." This, in turn, can boost our self-worth and self-esteem,2 Amodio explains. 

Creative Expression

"Creativity allows for emotional release without words," says Boucher. Experimenting with different products, colors, and makeup looks can be a fun and freeing way to shift focus away from intrusive thoughts and express yourself, even if the look never leaves your bathroom mirror, says Amodio. 

How Creativity Positively Impacts Your Health
Social and Emotional Benefits

A makeup routine can also positively impact our emotional and social well-being through:

Improved Social Interactions

A makeup routine may help you feel more prepared and put together, reducing feelings of self-consciousness in social situations. "This could help make interactions seem less scary and more enjoyable," says Dr. Elembaby.

According to Amodio, it could also serve as an icebreaker or a common ground to connect with others given the popularity of makeup trends, making it easier to engage in conversations despite the low motivation or social anxiety that often accompanies depression. 

Mood Enhancement

Depression is viewed as a state in which you have an overly critical view of yourself, the world, and the future. This is why "living in the present moment is really hard when you feel depressed. Having a positive outlook may be even harder," says Celeste Simmons, PhD, a San Diego-based psychologist. A makeup routine can help with both by acting as a form of 'behavioral activation.' A behavioral activation is a psychological approach of engaging in something meaningful and pleasurable to improve mood, even if your motivation is low, Dr. Simmons explains. 

This, in turn, activates the brain's reward system, releasing neurotransmitters like dopamine, which can elevate mood and reinforce self-care behaviors, notes Dr. Elembaby. 

"In college, my sorority used to say, 'Take the extra five,' as a reminder to put just five extra minutes into personal grooming before stepping out so we could present a refined image on behalf of the org. Nearly 20 years since I first heard this phrase, I still tell myself 'take the extra five' on days where I feel particularly rushed and a bit frazzled. Now though, I know that that extra five minutes isn't just about looking nice, but how personal presentation has a direct effect on my mood and confidence," shares Channing Muller, a 39-year-old business owner and run coach from Chicago. 

6 Things People Get Wrong About Depression, From a Therapist
Mindfulness and Focus

Another interesting mental health benefit of a makeup routine is its ability to promote mindfulness by using:

Mindful Application

"In therapy, mindfulness is used in treating most mental illnesses, including depression and anxiety," says Morgan DeLeo, a New York therapist specializing in depression, anxiety, and self-esteem issues. Mindfulness is the practice of being fully present in the moment and becoming more self-aware without judgment. 

"The slow, measured, repetitive steps of applying makeup encourage present-moment awareness," says Boucher. Focusing on different colors, textures, scents, and sensations can shift the mind away from anxious or depressive thoughts, creating a calming effect, she explains. 

"I consider my makeup routine 'therapy' because it allows me to just focus…and quiet my mind from stress and overthinking," says Shanna Bynes Bradford, a 48-year-old aromatherapist and medical esthetician based in Florida.

The slow, measured, repetitive steps of applying makeup encourage present-moment awareness.

- STEPHANIE BOUCHER, MC, RP
Routine as a Grounding Technique

Grounding is a psychological tool that helps you fire up your senses and focus on something tangible to better manage your thoughts and emotions, explains Dr. Simmons. A makeup routine can help you do just that, she adds.

The sensory experience of putting on makeup can be very tactile and visually appealing, which can stimulate us to be present, notes DeLeo. "It forces your brain to not give as much space to the 'what ifs' of intrusive thoughts," she says.

In addition, the structure, predictability, and sense of control a consistent routine provides act as mental "anchors" that can help us stay present and grounded.

Earthing-A Technique to Help Ground Your Body
How to Incorporate Makeup into a Depression Management Plan

Here are four expert-approved ways to use makeup as a self-care practice without feeling overwhelmed:

Start small: Amodio suggests starting with any one makeup product to ease into the routine. "I'd recommend putting it someplace where it is easily accessible to encourage use," says DeLeo. 
Keep it simple: Keep the routine simple and focus on the experience as a whole, suggests Amodio. How did you feel before? How do you feel after? What do the products smell like? Feel like? Consider using hybrid makeup products to streamline the process. Think tinted lip balms with SPF and hydrating makeup multisticks.
Try habit stacking: Habit stacking is essentially piggybacking a new habit onto an established habit to make it more likely to stick. For example, you could put on your makeup right after you brush your teeth, says DeLeo. 
Make it relaxing: Amodio suggests pairing your makeup routine with positive affirmations, a mindfulness meditation, or your favorite podcast to make the process even more uplifting. 
Color Analysis: How to Look and Feel Your Absolute Best Based on Your Color Season
Takeaway

For those living with depression, a makeup routine can be a powerful yet accessible creative outlet that may improve mood and self-esteem. Whether you like playing with neons or taking the minimalist route, it's how you feel while wearing it that truly matters. And to that, I raise my beauty blender. That said, it's important to note while makeup can be a valuable self-care tool, it's not a substitute for professional treatment or therapy. 

The Best Online Therapy Services for Depression We Tried and Tested
Read More:
LIVING WELL
SELF-IMPROVEMENT
2 Sources

By Noma Nazish
With nearly a decade of journalistic experience, Noma Nazish is passionate about covering the intersection of lifestyle and wellness with a soft spot for sustainability. Her work has appeared in various national and international publications like Cosmopolitan, The News Hub, and Zee News English, among others.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback