LIVING WELL
Mindfulness and Meditation
Guided Meditations

Mediation has many health benefits like calming your body and improving your immune system. And there's no right way to meditate, either. In fact, there are many different techniques from sound baths to manifestation meditation. There's a form of meditation for just about everyone. Learn how to use meditation to relieve stress and tension, relax the body, find focus, and center your mind.

What Happens to Your Brain When You Meditate Every Day?
8 Types of Meditation to Find Your Calm
Sound Healing for Self-Care
Mindfulness vs Meditation: What's the Difference?
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
What are the benefits of meditation?

Meditation has many benefits, including lowering stress, improving immune function, and slowing mental aging. Your physical and emotional stress can melt away by learning to calm your body and mind. This leaves you feeling better, refreshed, and ready to face the challenges of your day with a healthy attitude.

Learn More: The Benefits of Meditation for Stress Management
What's the difference between mindfulness and meditation?

Mindfulness and meditation are terms that are often used interchangeably, but they're not exactly the same. Mindfulness is the mental state in which you focus your awareness on the present. Meditation is a tool we can use to develop a regular practice of mindfulness.

Learn More: Mindfulness vs. Meditation: What's the Difference?
How long should you meditate for?

The ideal length of time to meditate per session varies among individuals and practices. Generally, however, experts recommend meditating for between five and 45 minutes per day. If you're a beginner, start with short sessions of a few minutes, and add time as you develop your meditating skills.

Learn More: How Long Should You Meditate?
What are some common meditation techniques?

Here are five beginner-friendly meditation techniques (that also work for experienced meditators, too!): basic meditation, focused meditation, activity-oriented meditation, mindfulness meditation, and spiritual meditation.

Learn More: 5 Meditation Techniques to Get You Started
KEY TERMS
Mantra
Grounding Techniques
Manifestation
Sound Bath
Mindfulness Meditation
Mantra

A mantra is the continuous repetition of a particular word or phrase. What makes mantras so powerful in various situations is how they can calm the mind. When incorporated into regular practice, it can bring awareness to the current moment and settle negative thoughts to calmer levels. 

Having Trouble Meditating? A Mantra Can Help
Grounding Techniques

Grounding techniques are mental and emotional exercises that help us reconnect with the present moment and reduce feelings of anxiety, stress, or dissociation.

Grounding Techniques for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Manifestation

Manifestation meditation is a self-help approach to achieving goals through visualization and intentional thought. During manifestation meditation, you utilize meditative techniques to focus on visualizing goals and outcomes.

Can You Create the Life You Want Through Manifestation Meditation?
Sound Bath

A sound bath is a meditative experience where those in attendance are "bathed" in sound waves. These waves are produced by various sources, including healing instruments such as gongs, singing bowls, percussion, chimes, rattles, tuning forks, and even the human voice itself.

What Is a Sound Bath?
Mindfulness Meditation

Mindfulness meditation is a mental training practice that teaches you to slow down racing thoughts, let go of negativity, and calm both your mind and body. It combines meditation with the practice of mindfulness, which can be defined as a mental state that involves being fully focused on "the now" so you can acknowledge and accept your thoughts, feelings, and sensations without judgment.

What to Know About Mindfulness Meditation
EXPLORE MINDFULNESS AND MEDITATION
I'm a Therapist and I Tried the Viral 17-Second Manifestation Technique-Here's How It Went
I Tried NSDR for a Week-Here's How It Improved My Mental Health
What Happens to Your Brain When You Listen to Binaural Beats
Can Meditation Actually Save Your Sex Life?
How You Should Meditate, According to Your Personality
Having Trouble Meditating? A Mantra Can Help
Feeling Anxious? Try the 5-4-3-2-1 Grounding Technique
How to Stay Grounded With Visualization Meditation
Can You Create the Life You Want Through Manifestation Meditation?
How Bedtime Meditation Can Help Turn Your Brain Off at Night
A Complete Guide to Buddhist Meditation: Principles, Techniques, and Benefits
How to Self-Soothe With Mantra Meditation
How Metta Meditations Can Help You Cultivate Compassion
How to Practice Gratitude Meditation for Daily Well-Being
Yoga Nidra: The Sleep Meditation for Restorative Rest and Relaxation
Qigong 101: A Beginner's Guide to the Art of Cultivating Vital Energy
The Benefits of Walking Meditation and How to Get Started
How Often Do I Need to Meditate to Feel the Benefits?
How to Raise Your Self-Awareness Through Vipassana Meditation
A Beginner's Guide to Chakra Meditation
Want to Move Through Your Day With Ease? Try Morning Meditation
I Tried Junk Journaling For a Month-Here's What Happened
I Tried Meditation for My Depression-Here's What I Learned
Can You Benefit From "Lucky Girl Syndrome"?
How TikTok's 'Burnt Toast Theory' Can Help Us Navigate the Lows of Life
When Is the Best Time to Meditate?
Earthing-A Technique to Help Ground Your Body
Meditation Tips and Potential Benefits for Men
How to Meditate With Crystals
What It Means If You're Crying During Meditation
How Long Should You Meditate?
How to Do Meditation
Meditating With ADHD: Tips, Strategies, Resources
How to Meditate at Home
Meditation Facts: Why You Don't Have to Clear Your Mind
How Meditation Can Help You Through the Winter
What Is a Brain Orgasm?
Mindful Eating Can Help You Be More Present and Relaxed at Mealtime
What To Know about the Mind-Body Practice of Tai Chi
Best Meditation Retreats
What Is a Sound Bath?
What Is Kundalini Meditation?
Holotropic Breathwork Benefits and Risks
How to Know if Zen Meditation Is Right for You
Box Breathing Techniques and Benefits
Transcendental Meditation and Its Many Benefits
What to Know About Mindfulness Meditation
How to Sit When Learning Meditation
How to Practice Music Meditation
Guided Meditation for Sleep: How to Get Started
5 Meditation Techniques to Get You Started
Best Guided Meditations
Can Tibetan Singing Bowls Help Relieve Stress?
How to Become More Mindful in Your Everyday Life
How to Practice Loving Kindness Meditation
How to Meditate With Incense
Health Benefits of Mindfulness-Based Stress Reduction
A Quick and Simple 5-Minute Meditation
Focused Meditation: How to Start a Practice
Use Guided Imagery For Relaxation
Can Mindfulness Relieve More Than Stress?
What Is Body Scan Meditation?
How to Reduce Stress With Breathing Exercises
More In Living Well
Sleep and Dreaming
Emotions
Race and Social Justice
Gender Identity
Sexual Identity
Self-Improvement
Stress Management
Relationships