How You Should Meditate, According to Your Personality

Are you meditating wrong? Hmmm

By Wendy Rose Gould Updated on June 28, 2024
 Reviewed by Alicia Bigelow, ND

Olena Harbar / Getty Images

Table of Contents
Can Meditation Work for All Personality Types?
Choosing a Practice Based On Your "Meditation Personality"
Final Thoughts

Something many don't realize about meditation is that it comes in a plethora of forms. Sure, there's the traditional practice of sitting cross-legged with your eyes closed and hands in prana mudra form, but that's just the tip of the meditation iceberg! From loving-kindness meditation to sound baths, smartphone apps like the Breethe App, and even walking meditations, each type has its own spin to calming and focusing your mind, reducing stress, and enhancing your well-being. And if you find your meditation personality? Well, you might just find yourself becoming a regular practitioner.

The Benefits of Meditation for Stress Management
Can Meditation Work for All Personality Types?

At its core, meditation is about observing your thoughts without judgment and staying present. It helps build emotional regularity and a healthier relationship with your mind so that you're not a victim to every negative or hurtful thought that passes, says meditation expert Murray Hidary.

However, meditation is not a one-size-fits-all technique. How you meditate relies on your personality. Do you feel more at peace by yourself? Does music calm you down easily? Is a quick walk in the park peaceful for you? Knowing the answers to these questions will help determine which meditation technique works best for you and your mind.

How Personality Impacts Our Daily Lives
Choosing a Practice Based On Your "Meditation Personality" 

There's no exact science to find the best meditation technique for your personality. Because, truly, how you meditate is a personal decision. But if you're a newbie to meditation and are unsure where to start-and which practice works best-we found the best meditation technique for every personality type.

For Introverts: Mindfulness Meditation

Introverts harness energy in their alone time and expend energy in social situations. As such, they may enjoy mindfulness meditation in a quiet, calm, and familiar setting. Mindfulness meditation involves paying attention to the present moment and focusing on the breath, body sensations, and sounds. It reduces stress, enhances self-awareness, and improves emotional regulation and mental clarity. 

To engage in mindfulness meditation, sit comfortably in a quiet space and close your eyes. Focus on your breath as you slowly inhale and exhale. Observe your thoughts without judgment, and try to redirect your breathing as you let the thought pass. 

Murray says that people who enjoy mindfulness meditation "often find satisfaction in the structured approach, which can help them gain insight into their thoughts and behaviors." Plus, research has found that those who participate in mindfulness-based stress reduction (MBSR) enjoy reduced stress levels.1

What to Know About Mindfulness Meditation
For Extroverts: Group Meditation

Extroverts thrive in the hustle and bustle of the world and fuel themselves through social interactions. That said, they still benefit from the calming and grounding effects of meditation but in a group or class setting. 

Group meditation involves meditating alongside others, usually in an in-person or virtual class aided by an instructor. Along with the therapeutic benefits, this group meditation fosters community and can deepen an extrovert's meditation experience through collective energy. Plus, it's a great way for this social personality type to meet others interested in meditation and mindfulness too. 

Best Meditation Retreats
For Creatives: Artful Meditation 

Creative people are often drawn to making things, be it painting, drawing, coloring, sewing, or beyond. There's something innately therapeutic about diving into an art project for this personality type, and engaging in creative activities can help focus their mind and help them forget outside stressors. 

Artful meditation, or "meditative art," fuses this creativity with mindfulness. It involves engaging in artistic activities like drawing, painting, or coloring while maintaining a meditative focus on the process. The form of practice boosts relaxation, provides an opportunity for self-expression, and encourages mindfulness. You don't have to be an amazing artist to enjoy it either-it's accessible and enjoyable for people of all skill levels.

The Benefits of Mindfulness-Based Art Therapy
For Music Lovers: Sound Baths 

Those drawn to music appreciate the combination of sounds coming together to create harmonies, rhythms, and vibrations. If that resonates with you, then consider sound baths, which can provide a deeply immersive and emotional experience. 

If you're unfamiliar, a sound bath is a meditative experience where participants are "bathed"in sound waves produced by instruments like gongs, singing bowls, and chimes. Research has found that vibrations help reduce stress, improve emotional well-being, and enhance mental clarity.2 These classes are often led by an instructor and involve lying or sitting down with closed eyes while immersive sounds and vibrations wash over you.

"The right music can guide the experience and keep the listener 'on the train' and in the journey," Murray notes. "The immersive experience of a musical meditation can help process emotions thereby reducing stress and cultivating connection with one's self and others." 

What Is a Sound Bath?
For Type A Personalities: Breathwork Meditation 

Type A personalities are always striving for order and are quick to accomplish any goal before them. This often leads them to burnout and perfectionism. Meditation can help assuage these pitfalls, particularly breathwork meditation. 

This meditation method focuses on controlling and manipulating breath to calm our bodies, minds, and emotional states. It's also very structured and orderly, which can appeal to type A people, notes Pavel Stuchlik, a breathwork instructor and founder of NOA|AON. 

"One of the main things that we teach is something called instant presence, which is breathwork number one," Stuchlik says. "Six seconds on inhale [and] six seconds on exhale out your nose."

Another option is box breathing, which involves breathing in for six seconds, holding for six seconds, exhaling for six seconds, holding for six seconds, and repeating. 

These 9 Breathing Exercises Can Help Relieve Anxiety
For Type B Personalities: Walking Meditation 

Type B personalities are pretty relaxed, easy-going, patient, and adaptable. They benefit from flexible and open-ended practices that allow for exploration and creativity. And walking meditation-either through nature or around the block-offers exactly that. 

"Walking meditation combines movement with mindfulness, focusing on the sensations of walking, such as the feel of the ground underfoot and the rhythm of the steps," Murray explains. "It can also create a deeper connection with one's surroundings as you walk through the landscape." 

Walking meditation also takes the practice of meditation out into the world, helping integrate mindfulness into daily activities. This makes it a practical and dynamic form of practice. 

The Benefits of Walking Meditation and How to Get Started
For Pessimists: Loving-Kindness Meditation 

Pessimists typically have a "glass half empty" mentality as they navigate life, often focusing on the downsides versus the positives. While this arguably realistic point of view isn't all bad, it's important to find the beauty in yourself and the world around you. Enter: Loving-Kindness Meditation. 

This form of meditation involves cultivating feelings of compassion, kindness, and goodwill toward yourself and others. For pessimists-who may struggle with negative self-talk and skepticism towards others-loving-kindness meditation offers a structured practice to cultivate positive emotions and empathy. Over time, it can help soften inner criticism, foster resilience, and promote a more compassionate worldview.

To practice, sit quietly, focus on feelings of love and compassion, and repeat phrases like "May I be happy, may others be happy." As you practice, allow these sentiments to grow. 

How to Practice Loving Kindness Meditation
For Optimists: Affirmation Meditation 

By their very nature, optimists tend to see the brighter side of situations, expecting favorable outcomes and maintaining a hopeful attitude. For them, affirmation meditation is a form of meditation that can help reinforce their positive beliefs and further cultivate that optimism. 

Affirmation meditation involves repeating positive statements aloud or silently. These may be phrases like "I am capable," "I attract positive experiences," or "I trust in my ability to overcome challenges." By consciously affirming uplifting statements, optimists strengthen their positive mindset, enjoy a nice boost to their self-esteem, and sustain their natural inclination towards seeing possibilities and opportunities.

25 Positive Daily Affirmations for Your Mental Health
For the Easily Distracted: Guided Meditation 

If you find it difficult to sit still or are easily distracted, you may get the most bang out of a guided meditation. This structured approach allows you to show up and follow instructions.

"In guided meditation, a narrator guides the practitioner through the meditation, often focusing on relaxation, visualization, or specific themes like gratitude or compassion," Murray says. "Guided voice meditation provides a clear framework and can be easier to follow, making it accessible for people new to meditation or those who find it difficult to focus on their own." 

Best Guided Meditations
Final Thoughts

Ultimately, the best type of meditation for you is the one that you personally enjoy and benefit from practicing. Try a few different types and see what feels right. You may also find that having a few variations in your back pocket allows you to keep things varied in your day-to-day life.

How Long Should You Meditate?
Read More:
LIVING WELL
MINDFULNESS AND MEDITATION
2 Sources

By Wendy Rose Gould
Wendy Rose Gould is a lifestyle reporter with over a decade of experience covering health and wellness topics.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback