CONDITIONS A-Z
Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Also known as OCD
Symptoms and Diagnosis
Treatment
Types
Living With OCD
 Medically reviewed by Daniel B. Block, MD Updated on August 22, 2023

Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) is a mental health condition that involves experiencing recurring thoughts (obsessions) that may then lead to repetitive behaviors (compulsions). An estimated 2.3% of U.S. adults experience OCD at some point in their lives and the condition tends to be more common in women than in men.1﻿

These obsessions and compulsions can take up a great deal of time, interfere with a person's ability to function in their daily life, and create significant distress. While the exact causes are not known, genetic, biological, and stress-related factors may play a role. Effective treatments are available and include medications and psychotherapy techniques such as cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and exposure and response prevention (ERP) therapy.

LIVING WITH OCD
Common Uncontrollable Thoughts From OCD
10 Cognitive Distortions You'll Learn About in Therapy
What Are Types of Obsession in OCD?
Hoarding Disorder: Get the Facts
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
What causes OCD?

The exact causes of OCD are not completely understood, but a combination of factors likely play a role. Research suggests that increased activity in certain areas of the brain is linked to a higher risk for OCD. Environmental factors including sudden life changes, relationship troubles, abuse, illness, and stress may also contribute to the onset of the condition.

Learn More: Common Risk Factors for OCD
How is OCD treated?

OCD is typically treated with medication and psychotherapy. Psychotherapy may focus on changing the underlying thoughts that contribute to the disorder (through cognitive behavioral therapy), or exposing people to things they fear in order to gradually reduce the response (through exposure and response prevention therapy).

Learn More: How to Recover From OCD
Is OCD genetic?

Research suggests that genetics may cause people to have a predisposition to OCD, but that does not mean that there is an "OCD gene." Instead, certain groups of genes may increase vulnerability. While a person might have a genetic predisposition to OCD, it is the interaction of these genes and environmental variables that likely triggers the onset of the condition.

Learn More: Genetic Factors in OCD
Is OCD considered an anxiety disorder?

OCD shares similarities with some anxiety disorders, but there are important distinctions between the types of disorders. In the earlier version of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual (DSM), OCD was classed with anxiety disorders. In the 2013 publication of the DSM-5, OCD was separated into its own unique category called "Obsessive-Compulsive and Related Disorders."

Learn More: OCD vs. Generalized Anxiety Disorder
What are the types of OCD?

While the DSM-5 does not list specific subtypes, research suggests that OCD can present in a few different forms that are distinguished by the type of symptoms involved. Common types of OCD include those that are centered on hoarding, ordering/symmetry, contamination/cleaning, checking, and obsessive thoughts without compulsions.

Learn More: Subtypes of OCD
KEY TERMS
Mental Illness
Obsession
Compulsion
Psychological Evaluation
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
Exposure and Response Prevention
Deep Brain Stimulation
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
Mental Illness

A mental illness is a condition that affects thinking, emotion, and/or behavior. This creates significant distress and makes it difficult to function in work, school, family, and social activities. Mental illnesses are common and affect approximately 20% of adults in the U.S. Types of mental illnesses include anxiety disorders, depression, eating disorders, OCD, and personality disorders.

What Is a Mental Illness?
Obsession

In OCD, obsessions are repeated, persistent, and troubling thoughts or images that create distress. These recurring thoughts may compel people to perform certain behaviors, known as compulsions, in order to relieve the anxiety caused by the obsessive thoughts. Some people with OCD experience obsessions on their own, while others experience both obsessions and compulsions.

What Is an Obsession?
Compulsion

A compulsion is a behavior or mental act that a person with OCD is driven to repeat. The compulsive behaviors are used to help reduce or manage feelings of anxiety or distress that are caused by obsessive thoughts. While these behaviors differ, some common compulsions often focus on cleaning/washing, checking, repetition, ordering, and thinking/saying specific words or phrases.

What Is a Compulsion?
Psychological Evaluation

A psychological evaluation is a mental health assessment that a doctor or mental health professional performs to determine if a person has a mental disorder. It may involve an interview, questionnaires, psychological tests, a physical exam, and a health history. An evaluation can help doctors make a diagnosis and recommend a course of treatment.

Is There a Mental Illness Test?
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy

CBT is an approach to treatment that involves identifying and changing the underlying thoughts that contribute to a behavior. Automatic underlying thoughts can often cause or worsen obsessions and compulsions. By learning to identify and then change these thoughts, people can better manage the symptoms of their condition.

What Is Cognitive Behavioral Therapy?
Exposure and Response Prevention

ERP is a form of CBT in which people are gradually exposed to the source of their fear or anxiety under the supervision of a mental health professional. People are prevented from carrying out compulsive behaviors and instead learn to engage in other ways of reducing anxiety. Over time, people become habituated to the source of their anxiety so that it no longer triggers the problematic response.

Exposure Therapy for OCD
Deep Brain Stimulation

Deep brain stimulation is a procedure used in some cases of treatment-resistant OCD (OCD that does not respond to medication and psychotherapy). DBS involves a neurosurgical treatment in which a device is implanted in the brain to deliver small electrical shocks to certain regions of the brain. Research suggests that targeting specific circuits in the brain may reduce symptoms of severe OCD.

Alternative Treatments and Therapies for OCD
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation

This procedure places magnetic devices on the skull to deliver powerful pulses of magnetic energy to specific areas of the brain. Research suggests TMS may be beneficial for OCD that has not responded to medication or psychotherapy. While it is non-invasive and has few side effects, its effectiveness has not yet been clearly established so it should not be used in place of other treatments.

How Does Repetitive TMS Work?
EXPLORE OBSESSIVE-COMPULSIVE DISORDER
What Are the Symptoms of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder?
An Overview of Mental Health Statistics 
What Is Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD)?
OCPD vs. OCD: What's the Difference?
Intrusive vs. Impulsive Thoughts: What's the Difference?
Type A Personality vs. Obsessive-Compulsive Personality Disorder vs. OCD
Thought-Action Fusion and OCD
The 3 Main Theories of Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
What Is Thought Suppression?
Is Obsessive Compulsive Disorder Genetic?
How to Understand and Let Go of Intrusive Thoughts
What Is a Guilt Complex?
How Being a Germaphobe Can Be a Symptom of OCD
Similarities and Differences Between Hypochondriasis and OCD
Vicarious Trauma: The Cost of Care and Compassion
OCD, Self Injury, and Suicidal Thoughts
Could Your Nose Picking Habit Be a Sign of Rhinotillexomania?
Understanding Body Dysmorphic Disorder (BDD)
Common Obsessions and Compulsions Among People With OCD
The Difference Between Early and Late-Onset OCD
How OCD and ADHD Similarities Can Cause Misdiagnosis
Understanding Compulsive Shopping Disorder
The Link Between OCD and Schizophrenia
Bigorexia or Muscle Dysmorphia
How GAD and OCD Compare
4 Things Your OCD Therapist Should Avoid in Treatment
What Is Psychosurgery?
Treatments for Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Self-Help Strategies for Living With OCD
Exposure Therapy for OCD
Group Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for OCD
OCD Medications: How Antidepressants and Antipsychotics Can Help
Herbal Remedies for OCD and Anxiety Disorders
What Is Habit Reversal Training?
Psychological Therapy for OCD
Scrupulosity: An Overview of Religious or Moral OCD
What to Know About Pedophile OCD
'Pure O': An Overview of Pure Obsessional OCD
"Just Right" OCD
What Is Skin Picking Disorder?
Treating Postpartum Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Understanding Trichotillomania (TTM)
The Fear of Losing Control With OCD
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder (OCD) and Perfectionism
OCD Subtypes: Types of Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder
Shame and Guilt in OCD
How OCD Can Impact Your Sex Life
The Link Between OCD and Suicide
Dealing With Your Teen Who Has OCD
Why Do I Need Constant Reassurance With OCD?
How to Recognize Signs of OCD in Children
How Can I Stop OCD Thoughts?
Dating Someone With OCD: What You Should Know
Identifying and Coping With Relationship OCD
Sexual Obsessions in OCD
OCD and Intimate Relationships
Living With Pagophagia
More In Conditions A-Z
Neurodivergence
Phobias
Anxiety
Kids' Mental Health
Addiction
ADHD
Eating Disorders
Bipolar Disorder
BPD
Depression
Neurological Disorders
PTSD
Panic Disorder
Schizophrenia
Page Sources