Psychology
Student Resources
Theories

Psychology is the study of the human mind, and is the basis for many forms of mental health treatment, particularly psychotherapy. Psychology plays a role in our behaviors, emotions, relationships, personality, and much more.

Explore the various types of psychology, their history and the major theorists behind them, and apply this knowledge to your own mental and emotional well-being.

What Are the Big 5 Personality Traits?
Understanding Erikson's Stages of Psychosocial Development
How Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs Explains Human Motivation
What Is Piaget's Theory of Cognitive Development?
We've Been Testing Online Therapy For Years-These Services Are Worth Using
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
How does psychology affect mental health?

Many psychological factors, such as mood, stress levels, emotions, and coping mechanisms, can affect our overall mental wellness on a daily basis. Additionally, psychological disorders like depression or schizophrenia can have a long-term impact on our health and wellness.

Learn More: An A-Z List of Psychological Disorders
What's the difference between psychology and psychiatry?

While often used interchangeably, there are some key differences between psychology, the study of the mind, and psychiatry, which is a branch of medicine focused on treating mental health disorders. Psychologists and psychiatrists both can provide therapy, but typically only the latter can prescribe medication in order to treat biological factors affecting a person's mental health.

Learn More: Psychologists vs. Psychiatrists
Can you change your personality?

Traditionally, it is believed that personality is more or less set in stone, but research shows that it is possible to learn new behaviors-such as picking up new habits or challenging your self-beliefs-that can in turn affect your overall personality.

Learn More: Is Your Personality Constant?
KEY TERMS
Psychotherapy
DSM-5
Freud
Motivation
Personality
Psychotherapy

Psychotherapy is a form of mental health treatment that typically utilizes talk therapy with a credentialed professional to help overcome problematic thoughts or behaviors.

What to Know About Psychotherapy
DSM-5

The DSM is the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders. It is used by healthcare professionals to help diagnose mental health conditions. It is currently in its 5th edition.

How the DSM Works
Freud

Sigmund Freud (1856-1939), is the most well-known figure in the history of psychology. Many of his theories, such as the unconscious mind and the theory of psychosexual development, persist in some form to this day.

Sigmund Freud's Influence on Psychology
Motivation

Motivation is the process that guides and maintains our goal-oriented behaviors. In essence, it is the driving force behind why we choose to do certain things.

How Motivation Drives Our Behavior
Personality

Personality refers to the thoughts, behaviors, and feelings that make a person unique. It is believed that personality stays fairly consistent throughout a person's life.

EXPLORE PSYCHOLOGY
6 Signs That You Should Dump Your Psychiatrist, According to a Mental Health Professional
Critical Period in Brain Development: Definition, Importance
How a Z-Score Can Help You Compare Data-Here's How to Calculate It
How the Madonna-Whore Complex Affects Men's and Women's Mental Health
Information Processing Theory in Psychology
What Is a Dyssomnia?
What Is Family Stress Theory?
What Is a Parasocial Relationship?
What Is Media Psychology?
Understanding Adolescent Psychology
What Is Adrenaline?
What Are Conspiracy Theories?
Does Conventional Wisdom Hinder Creative Thinking?
What Is an Empath and How Do You Know If You Are One?
What Is Defensiveness?
The Psychology of Shame
What Happens Inside Your Brain When It's Too Cold?
High Temps Aren't Just Bad For the Earth-They Affect Your Brain Too
What Is Primal Therapy?
You Might Be One of These 4 Types of Introverts
What to Know About Adlerian Theory
Can You Really Identify a Psychopath By Their Eyes?
Martyr Complex: What It Means and How to Overcome It
How Nature Therapy Helps Your Mental Health
How Does Somatic Experiencing Therapy Work?
How to Prevent Illusory Correlation From Influencing Our Decisions
The Link Between Hormones and Mental Health
Identity Diffusion: Unraveling the Mystery of Self-Concept
What Is Humanistic Therapy?
Machiavellian Personality Traits
The 8 Best Online Psychiatry Services That Take Insurance, Tried and Tested
Deflection as a Defense Mechanism
Why Do I Cry in My Sleep?
How to Know That You Had a Vivid Dream
What Is a Therapy Desert?
Happy Crying: Why Does It Happen?
What Does a Trip Sitter Do?
What Is Interpersonal and Social Rhythm Therapy (IPSRT)?
Dependent Personality Disorder Signs and Symptoms
How Much Does a BCBA Make?
Do I Have to Like My Therapist?
How to Negotiate Your Therapy Rate
How to Change Your Therapist
Emotion Wheel: What It Is and How to Use One
What to Do If You Can't Afford Therapy Anymore
How to Save Money on Therapy
How Long Should I Be in Therapy?
What Is Filial Therapy?
What to Know About Existentialism-Philosophy and Existential Therapy
What Are the Rarest Phobias?
How an Intensive Outpatient Program (IOP) Works
What to Know About the DSM-5-TR
The Gift of Mental Wellness: Where to Find Free Therapy Online
What Are the 5 Stages of Memory?
HEXACO Personality Test: History, Facets, Benefits, Drawbacks
How Does Psychedelic Teletherapy Work?
How Psychoeducation Is Used in Therapy
What Your Therapist's Scope of Practice Means for You
How the Media Impacts Girls' Mental Health
How Violent Media Can Impact Your Mental Health
What Is Psilocybin Therapy?
How to Change Your Child's Therapist
What Is the Illusion of Choice?