CONDITIONS A-Z
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Also known as PTSD
Causes
Symptoms and Diagnosis
Treatment
Living With
 Medically reviewed by Steven Gans, MD Updated on July 19, 2024

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a mental health condition in which people experience a variety of symptoms following exposure to a traumatic event. These may include flashbacks, nightmares, intrusive thoughts, anxiety, avoidance, and changes in mood and thinking.

An estimated 6.8% of U.S. adults experience PTSD.1 Symptoms may include re-experiencing the traumatic event, avoiding reminders of the trauma, startling easily, and having negative thoughts and beliefs.

Causes of PTSD include abuse, violence, natural disasters, accidents, terrorism, illness, or the sudden death of a loved one. There are effective treatments that can help such as cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), exposure therapy, acceptance and commitment therapy, and eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR).

COPING WITH PTSD
What Does It Mean to Be Triggered?
What to Know About Delayed-Onset PTSD
Can Divorce or Separation Lead to PTSD?
How Being In Prison Can Affect Your Mental Health
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
What causes PTSD?

There are a number of factors that can play a role in how people respond to traumatic events. Genetics, for example, can influence how people handle stress during and after a trauma. People may be more likely to develop PTSD if they also have an existing mental health condition, have experienced trauma in the past, face other life stressors, and lack social support.

Learn More: PTSD Risk Factors
How is PTSD treated?

There are a number of treatments that can help reduce or eliminate PTSD symptoms. Antidepressants are sometimes prescribed to reduce symptoms of PTSD and manage symptoms of depression and anxiety if present. There are also psychotherapy techniques that can help including cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT), cognitive processing therapy, and eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR).

Learn More: How Is PTSD Treated?
How can you help someone with PTSD?

One way you can help a loved one with PTSD is to learn about the symptoms and the challenges of living with the condition. Encourage your loved one to seek help from a trained professional. Unaddressed symptoms of PTSD can become more severe over time, so it is important to try and help them find resources to begin the healing process.2﻿

Is PTSD considered a disability?

If you are unable to work in the field for which you are trained due to your PTSD symptoms, you may qualify for disability benefits. If your condition is due to military service, you may qualify for veteran's benefits. The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) also requires reasonable accommodations for people who have PTSD and have a record of impairment due to their condition.3﻿

KEY TERMS
Trigger
Psychiatric Disorder
Intrusive Memories
Hyperarousal
Psychological Evaluation
Trauma Response
Complex PTSD
Trigger

A trigger is something that can remind someone of a traumatic experience. PTSD triggers can be internal (feelings or emotions) and external (situations, people, places, or objects). When such triggers are present, people may be reminded of the event or even feel as if they are re-experiencing the trauma all over again.

How to Identify and Cope With PTSD Triggers
Psychiatric Disorder

A psychiatric disorder is a mental illness that significantly affects thinking, behavior, and emotions. These disorders can have a serious impact on your ability to function in your daily life and include conditions such as PTSD, depression, and schizophrenia. While such conditions can lead to impairment, there are treatments that can help people manage their symptoms and improve functioning.

Common Psychiatric Disorders
Intrusive Memories

Intrusive memories involve emotionally-linked images or impressions that come to mind involuntarily. For those with PTSD, such memories center on a traumatic event and can be extremely disruptive and distressing.4﻿ Treatments often focus on helping people more effectively process and restructure these intrusive traumatic memories.

How to Anticipate and Manage Intrusive Thoughts
Hyperarousal

Hyperarousal is a set of symptoms of PTSD that happens when people go into a high state of alert after their trauma. Even when there is no real danger present, people may respond as if they are facing a very real threat. They may startle easily and experience symptoms of irritability, anxiety, difficulty sleeping, panic attacks, and hypervigilance.

Recognizing Hyperarousal Symptoms
Psychological Evaluation

A psychological evaluation is a way to assess a person's mental health. A doctor, psychiatrist, or psychologist may use a range of tools such as interviews, questionnaires, observations, and psychological tests to look for signs and symptoms of a mental illness. This can help a doctor determine a diagnosis and an approach to treatment based on the individual's needs.

Is There a Mental Illness Test?
Trauma Response

A trauma response is how we respond to trauma. Mental health professionals typically conceptualize this through the lens of fight, flight, freeze, or fawn. These responses are involuntary functions of our autonomic nervous system and take hold when we are faced with a traumatic experience.

As a Therapist, Here's What TikTok Gets Wrong About Trauma Responses
Complex PTSD

Trauma that is repeated and ongoing, such as child abuse or domestic violence, can lead to a condition known as complex post-traumatic stress disorder (C-PTSD). In addition to other symptoms of PTSD, people with complex PTSD also have difficulty with emotions, hold negative self perceptions, struggle with relationships, and may feel detached from the trauma.

What is Complex PTSD?
EXPLORE POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER
How Trauma Can Affect Your Window of Tolerance
The 8 Best Online Psychiatry Services That Take Insurance, Tried and Tested
What Is Post-Traumatic Growth (PTG)?
Understanding ADHD and Trauma
What to Know About PTSD in Teenagers
How to Cope With Sibling Grief
How Witnessing Domestic Violence Affects Children
Victim Mentality: Definition, Causes, and Ways to Cope
'Time Heals All Wounds:' Is There Any Truth to This?
What Is Acoustic Trauma?
Can You Prevent PTSD After A Trauma?
An Overview of Trauma and Stressor-Related Disorders
20 Worst Things to Say and Do to Someone With PTSD
Why Can't I Remember My Childhood? A Therapist Explains
As a Therapist, Here's What TikTok Gets Wrong About Trauma Responses
Immigration Trauma: What It Is and How to Cope
What Is Unresolved Trauma?
What Does the Term 'Emotional Baggage' Mean?
How to Find a Narcissistic Abuse Support Group
What Does It Mean to Have a Psychotic Break?
Nightmare Disorder: Symptoms, Causes, and Treatment
What Are the Mental Health Effects of Being Adopted?
Sexual Trauma: Causes, Symptoms, Consequences, and Treatments
The Mental Health Effects of Living in Foster Care
What to Know About Traumatic Shock
How to Find Emotional Healing
Understanding Intergenerational Trauma and Its Effects on Mental Health
Signs of Childhood Trauma in Adults
Why Am I So Angry?
An Overview of Mental Health Statistics 
An Overview of Brief Psychotic Disorder
Causes and Risk Factors of PTSD
Symptoms and Diagnosis of PTSD
How PTSD Is Treated
Coping With PTSD
How Complex PTSD (C-PTSD) Differs from PTSD
Craig Grossi: A Marine With a "Stubbornly Positive" Mission
The Rates of PTSD in Military Veterans
The Painful Effects of Attachment Trauma
Signs of Emotional Abuse From Parents
Recognizing the Signs of Psychological Abuse
Betrayal Trauma-The Impact of Being Betrayed
What Are the Different Types of Bullying?
Understanding Bereavement After a Loss
What Does It Mean to Be the Family Scapegoat?
Adverse Childhood Experiences (ACEs)
What Is Stalking?
Does Living With Racism Cause Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder?
Coping With PTSD Symptoms Following a Shooting
The Risk of PTSD After a Car Accident
Understanding PTSD After Sexual Assault
How Trauma and PTSD Impact the Brain
How Narcissistic Abuse Can Cause C-PTSD
What Is Medical Trauma?
Childhood Trauma and Intermittent Explosive Disorder
Identifying and Coping With Emotional Shock
Symptoms of PTSD in Women
What Is a Guilt Complex?
What Is Irritability?
What Is Trauma?
Hypervigilance in PTSD and Other Disorders
What Is Emotional Numbness?
What Is Post Traumatic Relationship Syndrome?
More In Conditions A-Z
Neurodivergence
Phobias
Anxiety
Kids' Mental Health
Addiction
ADHD
Eating Disorders
Bipolar Disorder
BPD
Depression
Neurological Disorders
OCD
Panic Disorder
Schizophrenia
Page Sources