LIVING WELL
Race and Social Justice

Race is everywhere. It plays an important role in our identity and shapes our perspectives including how we think and feel about mental health. There are many mental health considerations unique to certain racial and cultural groups. The stigmatization of bisexual men, the strong Black women stereotype, and the lack of mental health services for Indigenous communities. These are just a few examples of how race and culture align with mental health and wellness. Learn more about the relationship between your identity, your racial group, and your mental health here.

What's the Difference Between Race and Ethnicity?
What Does It Mean To Be Anti-racist?
Is It Possible to Overcome Implicit Bias?
What Is Intersectionality?
Understanding White Privilege
The Intersection of LGBTQIA+ and BIPOC Identities
Playing the Game of Respectability Politics, But At What Cost?
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
What is the concept of race?

The dictionary by Merriam-Webster defines race as "a category of humankind that shares certain distinctive physical traits."1

Race is usually associated with biology and linked with physical characteristics, such as hair texture or skin color, and covers a relatively narrow range of options. Yet people of similar complexions/hair textures can be defined as different races, and definitions in the United States have changed over time.

What are the six categories of race?

When completing paperwork that asks for race, you may be asked to identify yourself as belonging to one or more of the following categories:

White
Black or African American
Asian
American Indian or Alaska Native
Native Hawaiian or Pacific Islander
Some other race

While some may be considered to be of a certain race, Black people, for example, may identify more with their individual ethnicity, as opposed to race. This could apply to any member of any race.

Learn More: Race vs. Ethnicity
Why is it important to learn about race and ethnicity?

Conversations about race and ethnicity are key to building empathy, facilitating acceptance, understanding, and respect for those with people from other backgrounds. Such histories of other cultures and races are often erased or minimized from mainstream narratives, so it is essential to learn about the struggles and experiences of marginalized groups.

Learn More: Why It's Important to Learn About Indigenous Peoples
KEY TERMS
BIPOC
Inclusion
Diversity
Microaggressions
Cultural Assimilation
Intersectionality
BIPOC

The acronym BIPOC stands for "Black, Indigenous, and People Of Color" and is pronounced "buy-pock" as opposed to saying each letter individually. The BIPOC acronym builds on the former acronym of POC ("people of color"), acknowledging that not all people of color have the same experiences or deal with the same types of injustice. 

What Does the Acronym BIPOC Mean?
Inclusion

Inclusion refers to "the act or practice of including and accommodating people who have historically been excluded (because of their race, gender, sexuality, or ability)."2

What Is Inclusion?
Diversity

Diversity refers to the quality of representing people from a range of different social and ethnic backgrounds and of different genders, sexual orientations, etc.

Why It's Important to Diversify Your Friendships
Microaggressions

A microaggression is a subtle verbal or nonverbal behavior, committed consciously or not, that is directed at a member of a marginalized group, and has a harmful, derogatory effect.

How Do Microaggressions Affect the AAPI Community?
Cultural Assimilation

Cultural assimilation refers to the act of sacrificing one's own culture to adopt the lifestyle, behaviors, and beliefs of the dominant culture/group.

What Are Respectability Politics?
Intersectionality

The term "intersectionality" was first coined by civil rights scholar Kimberlé Crenshaw in the late '80s. It refers to an individual's multiple identities and how they're subject to various forms of intersecting oppression.

What Is Intersectionality?
EXPLORE RACE AND SOCIAL JUSTICE
Yes, Even Social Activists Need Rest Too
Why Identity Matters and How It Shapes Us
10 Types of Discrimination to Be Aware Of
Cultural Awareness-How to Be More Culturally Aware & Improve Your Relationships
How Embracing Your Cultural Identity Can Help Your Mental Health
The Impact of Racial Trauma and How to Cope
The Mental Effects of Racism on the Latinx Community
What Is Racial Ambiguity?
6 Harmful Stereotypes About Latin Americans
Why Black Mental Wealth Is the Bigger Picture of Black Mental Health
As a Therapist, Here Are 4 Ways to Cope in Times of Civil Unrest
Understanding and Addressing Stereotype Threat
The Differences Between Appreciating and Appropriating Culture
Health Literacy: The Overlooked Treatment Gap & Its Impact on BIPOC Mental Health
Broken Windows Theory
'Marianismo' Culture in the Latino Community and How It Impacts Mental Health
Machismo: The Traits and Impact of Traditional Masculinity
How Do Microaggressions Affect the AAPI Community?
10 Mental Health Strategies That Have Asian Origins
Code Switching: How and Why It Happens
Cultural Assimilation-How It Affects Mental Health
What to Do When a Loved One Is Being Racist
What Is Emotional Labor?
How to Cope With Black Racial Injustice
Mental Health Resources for the Black Community
17 Mental Health Resources For Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders
8 Mental Health Resources for the Latino Community
Does Living With Racism Cause Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder?
What Does the Term 'LatinX' Mean?
Mental Health Effects of Racism on Indigenous Communities
How Othering Contributes to Discrimination and Prejudice
Exploring the Mental Health Stigma in Black Communities
Understanding What Police Brutality Is and Why It Occurs
Colorism and the Impact of Skin Tone Discrimination
Systemic Racism Takes a Toll on BIPOC Mental Health
What Is Inclusion?
The Importance of Representation in Books
How to Navigate Your Own Privilege
Things to Consider Before You Call the Police on Someone
How to Find a Culturally Sensitive Therapist
What Is White Guilt?
10 Organizations That Support Racial Equality
The Psychology of Racism
Harmful Psychological Effects of Racial Stereotyping
7 Strategies to Help You on Your Anti-Racism Journey
What Is White Fragility?
What Are Microaggressions?
What Is the Model Minority Myth?
Understanding Environmental Racism
The Role of Silence in Asian American Families
Let's End the 'Undesirable Asian Male' Stereotype
If My Parents Stayed in Hong Kong, I May Not Be Alive Today
Why Fetishizing AAPI Women Is an Act of Violence
Mental Illness Doesn't Discriminate, and Neither Should We
"Have You Eaten Yet?": Food Is the Ultimate Asian Love Language
Mental Health Impact of Straddling a Dual Identity as an Asian American
South Asians Are Asians, Too
Intergenerational Trauma in AAPI Communities
Yes, "Positive Stereotypes" Are Still Harmful
How a Temazcal Works
What Is the Difference Between Hispanic and Latino?
Yolo Akili Robinson Is Building Up Black Communities
Vincent Flores-Maldonado Keeps Culture at the Core of Communal Healing
More In Living Well
Sleep and Dreaming
Emotions
Gender Identity
Sexual Identity
Self-Improvement
Stress Management
Relationships
Mindfulness and Meditation
Page Sources