LIVING WELL
Relationships
Dating
Sex and Relationships
Strengthening Relationships
Toxicity and Abuse

Healthy relationships are characterized by love and respect. Whether you are single, in a long-term partnership, or recently divorced, it's important to understand your communication style, how you behave in relationships, and how to feel more secure in your love life, friendships, and family relationships. Explore resources that'll help you create open conversations, identify issues, and much more.

FOUNDATIONS OF A STRONG RELATIONSHIP
Interdependence Can Build a Lasting and Safe Relationship
Just How Important Is Sex in a Relationship? It Really Depends
Everything to Know About the 5 Love Languages
17 Fun Things to Do This Weekend to Get Closer With Your Boo
A Therapist's Guide to the Best Online Couples Therapy-Starting at $75 a Session
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
How do you know when a relationship can't be saved?

While some issues, such as abuse or infidelity, may be instant relationship dealbreakers, other issues such as a lack of love, communication problems, lack of respect and trust, or growing apart may also be signs a relationship is in trouble.

Learn More: Signs Your Marriage Is Over
What do I do if my partner has cheated on me?

Infidelity doesn't always mean the end of a relationship, but there are a number of things to consider when a partner has been unfaithful, such as the nature of the cheating, your partner's remorse, and whether or not you feel you can forgive or trust them moving forward.

Learn More: Should You Give Your Partner a Second Chance?
Does couples counseling work?

Research supports the benefits of couples counseling, which can help change patterns of interaction, communication, your emotional connection, and how you handle conflict with your partner.

Learn More: How Couples Counseling Can Work for You
KEY TERMS
Couples Therapy
Codependency
Libido
Emotional Affair
Narcissism
Attachment Styles
Couples Therapy

Couples therapy is a form of psychotherapy that can help you and a partner improve your relationship. It has been shown to help improve communication, problem solving, and more.

How Couples Therapy Can Help
Codependency

Codependency is a mental, emotional, physical, or spiritual reliance on a partner, friend, or family member, who in turn uses that reliance to fulfill their own needs. It is generally considered an unhealthy relationship dynamic.

What to Know About Codependency
Libido

Libido is your sexual appetite or drive. It can be impacted by hormones, brain function, learned behaviors, and fluctuate based physical and mental health conditions such as stress or depression.

10 Ways to Increase Your Sex Drive
Emotional Affair

An emotional affair is when a person in a relationship invests significant time and energy in a friendship outside of that relationship to its detriment. While not sexually intimate, an emotional affair is often considered to be a form of cheating.

Characteristics of an Emotional Affair
Narcissism

Narcissism is a personality style marked by self-centeredness, lack of empathy, and an exaggerated sense of self-importance. In relationships, a narcissistic partner may lead you to feel manipulated and unloved and your needs unmet

Signs Your Partner Is a Narcissist
Attachment Styles

Attachment refers to the way you interact and behave in relationships. Believed to develop in childhood, your attachment style may impact your ability to have close, secure, long-lasting relationships.

What Is Your Attachment Style?
EXPLORE RELATIONSHIPS
How to Bounce Back After Sending an Embarrassing Text
Should You Tell Your Ex's New Partner That They Cheated on You? Reddit Weighs In
The Dos and Don'ts of Double Texting
The Career Consequences of Changing Your Last Name After Marriage
5 Signs Your Friend is Secretly Jealous of You
15 Phrases to Make People Respect You
Why Do I Always Attract Toxic Partners?
10 Signs an Emotionally Unavailable Man Is in Love with You
How to Make an Age Gap Relationship Work, From Couples Who've Been There
Knowing Your Sexual Desire Style Is *Key* to a Better Sex Life
4 Ways to Overcome Cultural Differences in Your Relationship
If You See These 8 Things in Your Relationship, You Might Be Settling
Questions to Ask When You're Forced to Talk to People
What You're Getting Wrong About Your "Type", According to a Matchmaker
All Lasting Friendships Have This One Thing in Common
This Is Why Your Crush Gives You So Much Anxiety, According to Experts
How Marriage Counseling Can Save Your Relationship, According to Therapists
If Your Friend Is Doing These 4 Things, They're Being Passive-Aggressive
Here's How to Connect With a Kid, According to Psychologists
4 Things You Need to Know Before Cutting Ties With Your Family
*This* Is When Emotional Monitoring Becomes Toxic
Help! I'm in a Relationship But I Have a Crush on Someone Else
The One Way You Might Be Manipulating Your Loved Ones Without Realizing It
24 Questions to Ask Yourself Before Rekindling With Your Ex
How to Define the Relationship (DTR) and Remain Cool, Calm, and Collected
My Friend Betrayed Me-Should I Repair Our Friendship or Cut My Losses?
If Receiving Gifts Is Their Love Language, Try 'Pebbling'
Is Your Friend Sabotaging You? Watch Out For These Red Flags
Wait, Am I the Black Cat in My Relationship?
Why Am I So Lonely All The Time?
30 Questions to Engage Someone Beyond 'How Are You?'
Do We Have the Same Relationship Non-Negotiables? An Investigation
How to Set Boundaries With Your Adult Children
I've Been Single for 4 Years. Is My Smut-Reading Habit to Blame?
How to Deal When You're Talking to a Conversational Narcissist
3 Therapists Share Their Top Friendship Dealbreakers
Should You Listen to Cliché Relationship Advice?
Why Didn't You Get a Second Date? A Relationship Coach Breaks It Down
Living Apart Together Is a Growing Trend-But Should You Be Doing It?
How to Maintain New Relationship Energy Even After the Honeymoon Phase
Help! My Roommate Is Ruining My Life
Is Parallel Play Hurting or Helping Your Relationship?
Are You The Only One Making The Effort? It Might Be a One-Sided Friendship
Can Your Attachment Style Change?
How Growing Up in a Big Family Shapes Your Development
Can an Optimist and a Pessimist Be Compatible?
So, Do You *Actually* Like Them or Is It the Romantic Fantasy Talking?
What Type of Friend Are You? Take This Quiz to Find Out
Is Hermeneutic Labor Hurting Your Relationship?
A Relationship Coach Shares Why It's Harder to Get Over a Situationship
The Dating Behaviors That Trigger My Anxious Attachment Style
Behold, Your Reason to Date a Golden Retriever Boyfriend
Wait, Is My Anxious Attachment Caused By Glass Child Syndrome?
7 Reasons Why You Need a Work Bestie
Why Does My Family Trigger My Anxiety?
A Letter to Those Grieving This Father's Day, From a Therapist
20 Things to Say to Your Co-Worker Who's Having a Hard Time
Are You Phubbing Your Partner?
25 Signs You Have a Work Wife or Husband (and the Benefits of Having One)
5 Signs Your BFF Is a True Tenured Friend
Why So Many Older Couples Are Falling Victim to the Gray Divorce Phenomenon
When Oversharing Turns into Trauma Dumping, and How to Stop
Is That Narcissist You Know Actually Just a Self-Absorbed Jerk?
More In Living Well
Sleep and Dreaming
Emotions
Race and Social Justice
Gender Identity
Sexual Identity
Self-Improvement
Stress Management
Mindfulness and Meditation