CONDITIONS A-Z
Schizophrenia
Living With
Treatment
Symptoms and Diagnosis
 Medically reviewed by Daniel B. Block, MD Updated on July 19, 2024

Schizophrenia is a mental illness that affects how the brain works. This leads to chronic problems with disordered thoughts and behaviors and symptoms such as hallucinations, delusions, and lack of emotional expression. 

Schizophrenia affects approximately 0.3% to 0.7% of people.1﻿ It impacts people from all racial backgrounds and ethnicities and is slightly more common in men than in women. The exact causes are unknown, but it has both genetic and environmental risk factors.

It usually requires lifelong care and treatment to help people manage their symptoms and live full, active lives. Treatment usually involves medications, psychotherapy, and social support. Coping strategies such as joining a peer support group and participating in social skills training can also be helpful.

UNDERSTANDING SCHIZOPHRENIA
I'm a Mental Health Professional and I Live with a Psychotic Disorder-Here's What It Feels Like
Dissociative Disorder vs. Schizophrenia: What Are the Differences?
The Experience of Hearing Voices in Schizophrenia
How to Manage Caregiving for Schizophrenia
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
What causes schizophrenia?

The exact causes of schizophrenia are not entirely understood, but a complex variety of influences likely play a role. Some potential causes include genetic, environmental, social, and psychological factors.

Learn More: Causes and Risk Factors for Schizophrenia
Is schizophrenia genetic?

Research suggests that genetics play a significant role in causing schizophrenia. Having a family member with the condition greatly increases your risk of developing schizophrenia. However, while the condition sometimes runs in families, having a family member with the condition does not necessarily mean that you will develop the disorder.2﻿

Is there a cure for schizophrenia?

There is no cure for schizophrenia, but there are treatments that can help people manage the symptoms of the condition and improve functioning. Treatments vary depending on each individual's needs but may include medications, psychotherapy, and family-based services. People may require different levels of care and support depending on the severity of their condition.

Learn More: How Is Schizophrenia Treated?
At what age does schizophrenia typically develop?

Research suggests that early symptoms of schizophrenia begin to appear sometime between late adolescence and early twenties, although they may begin later or earlier.3﻿ The age of onset is also typically later in women than in men. Symptoms appear gradually and become progressively more severe.

KEY TERMS
Psychosis
Antipsychotics
Psychosocial Intervention
Electroconvulsive Therapy
Mania
Delusions
Psychosis

Psychosis is a condition that affects the way the brain processes information and causes people to lose touch with reality. Symptoms of psychosis often include having false ideas about what is happening (delusions) or seeing and hearing things that are not really there (hallucinations).

What Is Psychosis?
Antipsychotics

Antipsychotics are medications used primarily to manage psychosis. While they do not cure the condition, they can help manage the symptoms of schizophrenia. Older antipsychotics are called "typical" or "first generation," while newer medications are called "atypical" or "second generation." There is also a purported "third generation," which includes aripiprazole (Abilify) or brexipiprazole (Rexulti).

Atypical Antipsychotics for Schizophrenia
Psychosocial Intervention

Psychosocial interventions include activities that focus on the cognitive, behavioral, social, and biological factors that play a role in an individual's well-being. Common psychosocial interventions for schizophrenia include cognitive therapy, psychoeducation, family intervention, assertive community treatment, and social skills training.4﻿

Electroconvulsive Therapy

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is a psychiatric treatment that involves using electrical stimulation to induce seizures. It is most frequently utilized for treatment-resistant depression, but it is sometimes used to treat schizophrenia that has not responded to treatment with antipsychotics.

What Is Electroconvulsive Therapy?
Mania

Mania is a symptom of bipolar disorder and is characterized by periods of sustained elevated mood, irritability, energy levels, and racing thoughts. When a person experiences symptoms of both bipolar disorder and schizophrenia, it may be an indicator of schizoaffective disorder.

Schizophrenia vs. Schizoaffective Disorder
Delusions

Common in schizophrenia, delusions are fixed, false beliefs that conflict with reality. If a person is in a delusional state, they can't let go of their untrue convictions, despite contrary evidence.

What Are Delusions?
EXPLORE SCHIZOPHRENIA
Word Salad: What It Is and Why It Happens
What Is Capgras Syndrome?
Anhedonia: What to Do When You Can't Experience Pleasure
What Is Psychosurgery?
What Is Thought Broadcasting?
An Overview of Mental Health Statistics 
What To Know About Saphris (Asenapine)
What To Know About Rexulti (Brexpiprazole)
High-Functioning Schizophrenia: Diagnosis, Treatment, Stigma
Does Schizophrenia Get Worse with Age?
What Is Alogia?
The Internal Experience of Schizophrenia
Living With Schizophrenia
A Family Affair: How Taye Diggs Is Lifting Up the Schizophrenia Community
Treatment for Psychosis
What Is a Dopamine Agonist?
How Schizophrenia Is Treated
Invega: Benefits, Side Effects, Dosage, and Interactions
What Is Delusional Disorder?
What Does It Mean to Have a Psychotic Break?
What Causes Hallucinations?
Delusions versus Hallucinations: What Are the Differences?
Types of Psychosis
What Causes Psychosis?
Psychosis vs. Schizophrenia: What Are the Differences?
The Relationship Between Schizophrenia and Dopamine
Schizoaffective Disorder: Depressive Type
What Is a Schizophrenic Episode?
What Is Schizoaffective Disorder: Bipolar Type?
What Are Paranoid Delusions?
What Are the Early Signs of Schizophrenia?
Schizophreniform vs. Schizophrenia: What's the Difference?
Catalepsy: Signs, Causes, Treatment, and Coping
What Is Schizophreniform Disorder?
What to Know About the Prodromal Phase in Schizophrenia
What Is Residual Schizophrenia?
What Is a Thought Disorder?
What to Know About the Phases Of Schizophrenia
What to Know About Dementia Praecox
What Are Somatic Delusions?
What Is Catatonia?
An Overview of Brief Psychotic Disorder
What Is Acute Schizophrenia?
What Is Schizotypal Personality Disorder?
What Are Persecutory Delusions?
What Is Disorganized Schizophrenia?
What Is Schizoaffective Disorder?
Schizophrenia in Children
Paranoia as a Symptom of Schizophrenia
Causes and Risk Factors of Schizophrenia
Thinking Process Abnormalities in Schizophrenia
Schizoaffective Disorder and Schizophrenia: What Are the Differences?
Positive Symptoms in Schizophrenia
Negative Symptoms in Schizophrenia
Signs and Symptoms of Schizophrenia
Flat Affect in Schizophrenia
Catatonic Symptoms in Schizophrenia and Other Conditions
Avolition or Lack of Motivation in Schizophrenia
The Relationship Between Autism and Schizophrenia
More In Conditions A-Z
Neurodivergence
Phobias
Anxiety
Kids' Mental Health
Addiction
ADHD
Eating Disorders
Bipolar Disorder
BPD
Depression
Neurological Disorders
PTSD
OCD
Panic Disorder
Page Sources