Sleep Disorders: Types, Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment
By Sanjana Gupta Updated on December 04, 2022
 Medically reviewed by Shaheen Lakhan, MD, PhD, FAAN

globalmoments/iStock/Getty Images Plus

Table of Contents
Types
Symptoms
Causes
Diagnosis
Treatment

Sleep disorders, also known as sleep-wake disorders, are conditions that can affect the amount, timing, or quality of your sleep, causing you to feel tired in the daytime and have difficulty functioning as a result.1

Millions of Americans aren't getting enough sleep and 50 to 70 million Americans have one or more sleep disorders.2 If you or a loved one haven't been sleeping well, it's important to visit a healthcare provider for an evaluation.

Sleep is a complex biological process during which your brain and body perform a number of functions that help you stay healthy; therefore, in addition to making you feel tired, not sleeping well can also affect your mental and physical health.3

Not getting enough sleep can also affect your academic or work performance, interpersonal relationships, and safety. A 2019 study notes that sleep disorders can have a serious impact on your quality of life.4

This article explores the types, causes, symptoms, diagnosis, and treatment of sleep disorders.

Types of Sleep Disorders

While there are over 80 types of sleep disorders, these are some of the most common ones:3

Insomnia: Insomnia is the most common type of sleep disorder. It is characterized by difficulty with falling asleep and staying asleep.
Sleep apnea: This is a breathing disorder wherein the person stops breathing for 10 seconds or more while they're sleeping.
Hypersomnia: Hypersomnia is a condition that is characterized by an inability to stay awake during the day. Narcolepsy is a type of hypersomnia.
Parasomnia: Parasomnia is characterized by unusual behaviors such as eating, walking, or talking while sleeping, falling asleep, or waking up.
Restless leg syndrome (RLS): This condition is characterized by a prickling or tingling sensation in the legs that is accompanied by a strong urge to move them.
Circadian rhythm disorders: These conditions are characterized by problems with the sleep-wake cycle, due to which the person is unable to go to sleep and wake up at the appropriate time.
Understanding Sleep Paralysis
Symptoms of Sleep Disorders

The symptoms you experience can vary depending on the type of sleep disorder you have. These are some common symptoms of sleep disorders:3

Taking over half an hour to fall asleep every night
Waking up several times every night and having trouble going back to sleep
Waking up too early in the morning
Having difficulty moving when you first wake up
Often feeling sleepy in the day or frequently taking naps
Falling asleep at the wrong times in the day
Snoring loudly, gasping, snorting, making choking sounds, talking, or not breathing for short periods of time while sleeping
Experiencing creeping, crawling, or tingling feelings in your arms or legs that get better with movement or massage, particularly while trying to fall asleep
Frequently jerking your arms or legs while sleeping
Having vivid, dream-like experiences while falling asleep or lightly dozing
Experiencing sudden muscle weakness when you're angry, scared, or laughing
What Is Chronic Sleep Deprivation?
Causes of Sleep Disorders

Sleep disorders can be caused by various factors that affect your body's circadian rhythm, such as:

Physical conditions, such as ulcers
Medical conditions, such as asthma
Psychiatric conditions, such as depression or anxiety
Genetic factors, as narcolepsy is genetic
Substances, such as alcohol
Stimulants, such as caffeine
Medications, since some drugs can hamper sleep 
Irregular schedules, which can interfere with the body's biological clock
Aging, since people spend less time in deep sleep as they get older
13 Possible Reasons Why You're Tired All the Time
Diagnosing Sleep Disorders

A healthcare provider such as a sleep specialist can diagnose a sleep disorder by:3

Reviewing your medical history
Inquiring about your symptoms and sleep difficulties
Asking you to maintain a sleep diary to record your sleep habits
Performing a physical exam
Performing a polysomnogram (sleep study) that monitors certain biological data while you're sleeping. The data may include your brain waves, eye movements, heart rate, blood pressure, or breathing rate. Some sleep studies also check whether you can stay alert during the day or how quickly you fall asleep while napping in the daytime.
Treating Sleep Disorders

Treatment for sleeping disorders can vary depending on the type of disorder you have. These are some of the treatment options for sleeping disorders:3

Good sleep hygiene
A cool, dark, and quiet sleeping environment
An active lifestyle and a healthy, balanced diet
Bright light therapy in the morning to reset your circadian rhythm
Relaxation exercises to reduce stress
Cognitive behavioral therapy to challenge stressful thought patterns
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) machine to treat sleep apnea
Medicines, such as sleeping pills, which are generally prescribed for short periods of time
Natural supplements, such as melatonin, which are also generally recommended for short-term use
What Is Sleep Therapy?
A Word From Verywell

Not getting a good night's sleep can leave most people tired, irritable, and cranky. Not sleeping well for several days on end can have more serious consequences as it can affect your physical and mental health, work, relationships, and ability to function.

If you suspect you or a loved one might have a sleeping disorder, it's important to visit a healthcare provider for a diagnosis and treatment. Your primary care provider can refer you to a sleep specialist, if needed. There are treatment options that can help.

What Is Periodic Limb Movement Disorder (PLMD)?
Read More:
LIVING WELL
SLEEP AND DREAMING
4 Sources

By Sanjana Gupta
Sanjana is a health writer and editor. Her work spans various health-related topics, including mental health, fitness, nutrition, and wellness.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback