LIVING WELL
Sleep and Dreaming

Sleep is a basic bodily function and an essential pillar of wellness but getting a proper night's rest isn't always an easy task. This could be due to battling anxious thoughts, physical illness, a sleep disorder, or maybe you simply drank too much caffeine too late in the day. Whatever the reason, poor sleep quality can seriously detract from our overall quality of life.

Then when we finally do get a good night's sleep we often wake up with all kinds of curious dreams to unpack-and that's the fun part!

Learn more about what your dreams might be telling you, how to develop better sleep habits, and how your mind uses the downtime to work through unconscious and unresolved feelings or experiences.

What Is Revenge Bedtime Procrastination?
Dream Analysts Uncover the Meaning Behind These 9 Common Dreams
Tips for Getting Back to Sleep Fast
Want Better Sleep? We Put These 6 Sleep Apps to the Test
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
How much sleep do you need by age?

The amount of sleep we need can vary depending on our age. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) lists the amount of sleep we need, by age:1

Newborns (0 to 3 months old): 14 to 17 hours of sleep per day (including naps)
Infants (4 to 12 months old): 12 to 16 hours of sleep per day (including naps)
Toddlers (1 to 2 years old): 11 to 14 hours of sleep per day (including naps)
Preschoolers (3 to 5 years old): 10 to 13 hours of sleep per day (including naps)
School-age children (6 to 12 years old): 9 to 12 hours of sleep per day
Teenagers (13 to 18 years old): 8 to 10 hours of sleep per day
Adults (19 to 60 years old): 7 or more hours of sleep per day
Adults (61 to 64 years old): 7 to 9 hours of sleep per day
Adults (65 years and above): 7 to 8 hours of sleep per day
Learn More: How to Ditch Poor Sleep Hygiene
How can I sleep instantly?

In order to fall asleep faster, you'll need to retrain your body and develop better sleep habits. Some of the habits to change include not reading and watching TV in bed, altering your behaviors in the hour leading up to sleep, and working on evening eating habits. Some skills you will develop include relaxation, not languishing in bed, and exposing yourself to more daylight.

Learn More: How to Fall Asleep Faster
Does dreaming mean good sleep?

It is possible to experience fragmentary dreams in non-REM sleep. This includes the lighter stages of sleep (called stage 1 and stage 2) and slow-wave sleep (called stage 3).2 It is believed that the dream content of non-REM is more simplistic. If REM-related dreams are a movie, non-REM dreams may be likened to a photograph.

Learn More: Why Can't I Remember My Dreams?
KEY TERMS
Lucid Dream
Insomnia
REM
Narcolepsy
Sleep Apnea
Lucid Dream

A lucid dream occurs when a person is asleep but aware that they are dreaming. In this state, a person can take control of their dream's narrative to some degree, essentially guiding and directing the course of their dream.

What Is a Lucid Dream?
Insomnia

Insomnia is a common sleep disorder that affects millions of Americans. This often unrelenting condition can impact sleep in multiple ways, including causing difficulty falling asleep, difficulty staying asleep, waking up too early (and not being able to fall back asleep), and poor sleep quality. 

What Is Insomnia?
REM

Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep is one of the four stages that the brain goes through during the sleep cycle. This period of the sleep cycle usually takes place about 90 minutes after a person first falls asleep. It is marked by a number of physiological changes that include muscle relaxation, eye movement, faster respiration, and increased brain activity.3

What Is REM Sleep?
Narcolepsy

Narcolepsy is a sleep disorder that is characterized by chronic, excessive daytime sleepiness. It is a neurological condition that impacts the brain's ability to manage the sleep-wake cycle. People who have this condition usually have a difficult time staying awake for extended periods of time, no matter what time it is or what they are doing.

What Is Narcolepsy?
Sleep Apnea

Sleep apnea is a common condition in which people stop breathing multiple times during the night due to upper airway obstruction. Because people briefly stop breathing, sometimes for 10 seconds or longer, their heart rate increases, blood oxygen levels drop, and sleep is briefly disrupted as the person wakes in order to breathe. 

Reasons You're Not Sleeping Well
EXPLORE SLEEP AND DREAMING
I Tried Reading for 30 Minutes Before Bed for a Week-Here's What Happened
I Tried Using a Red Light Filter on My Phone to Beat Doomscrolling -Did It Work?
This Underrated Hack Is the Simple Secret to Better Sleep
I Drank Tart Cherry Juice Before Bed for a Week-Here's What It Did for My Sleep
Why Sleep Disturbance and Atopic Dermatitis (AD) Go Hand in Hand
7 Foods to Help You Get a Great Night's Sleep
When Dreams Merge With Your Waking Life-What to Know About Deja Reve
The Drunken Monkey Sleep Hack Might Be a TikTok Trend Worth Trying
What Does It Mean to Dream About Being Chased?
What Are My Precognitive Dreams Trying to Tell Me?
Why It's Harder to Sleep As You Age
How Sleep Can Affect Your Longevity
Can a Better Night's Sleep Boost Your Memory?
How to Stop Nightmares From Terrorizing Your Sleep
What Do Dreams About Tornadoes Mean?
Why You Should Try Sleeping Nude Tonight, According to Science
What Does It Mean When You Dream About Getting Shot?
What Does It Mean to Have a Fever Dream?
Microsleep No More: How to Prevent Brief Sleep Episodes
What Does It Mean to Dream About Spiders?
Why Am I Naked in My Dreams Sometimes?
What Does It Mean to Dream of Your Teeth Falling Out?
What Happens to Your Body When You Hit The Snooze Button?
What Does It Mean When You Dream About Being Back in School?
What Does It Mean to Dream of Your Partner Cheating on You?
What Does It Mean When You Dream of Someone Who Passed Away?
Partner's Snores Keeping You Up? Consider a Sleep Divorce
How to Create an ASMR Sleep Routine That Will Put You Right to Bed
Sleep Quiz: How Well Are You Sleeping?
Apps That Claim to Help You Sleep Are a Dime a Dozen - These 5 Actually Worked
Why You're Having Dreams About Death, According to a Dream Analyst
What Happens in Your Brain During a Wet Dream
How to Lucid Dream, According to a Psychologist and a Dream Analyst
What Does It Mean When You Dream About Pregnancy?
What Is Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy for Insomnia (CBT-i)?
What Does it Mean When You Dream About Someone Dying?
What It Means When You Dream About Snakes, According to Dream Experts
What Does It Mean When You Dream About Someone?
How to Practice Sleep Syncing for Better Sleep and Energy
What Is Periodic Limb Movement Disorder (PLMD)?
Sleep Inertia: Getting Past the Grogginess
5 Sleep Strategies From Around the World
Is Sleep Debt Something You Should Worry About?
Obstructive Sleep Apnea and Its Effect on Mental Health
'I Want to Sleep But My Body Won't Let Me': Why Does This Happen?
What Is Delayed Sleep Phase Syndrome?
The Military Sleep Method: Benefits and How It Works
Do I Have Sleep Anxiety?
What Is a Circadian Rhythm Sleep Disorder?
8 Best Podcasts to Fall Asleep To
What Is Shift Work Sleep Disorder?
How Does the Scandinavian Sleep Method Work?
How Your Chronotype Affects Your Quality of Sleep
Can Sleep Apnea Be Cured?
What Are Stress Dreams?
Yes, Our Sleeping Positions Can Actually Impact Our Well-Being
What Is a Dyssomnia?
Understanding Sleep Paralysis
What Is Non-24-Hour Sleep-Wake Disorder?
Can Magnesium Glycinate Help You Sleep?
Sleep Disorders: Types, Causes, Symptoms, and Treatment
The Role of Sleep in Teen Mental Health
What Is NREM Sleep?
More In Living Well
Emotions
Race and Social Justice
Gender Identity
Sexual Identity
Self-Improvement
Stress Management
Relationships
Mindfulness and Meditation
Page Sources