Smoking With Generalized Anxiety Disorder

Does Nicotine Cause Anxiety?

By Will Meek, PhD Updated on January 05, 2024
 Medically reviewed by Amy Morin, LCSW

Stockbyte / Getty Images

Table of Contents
The Link
Temporary Relief
What to Do Instead
Frequently Asked Questions

For many people with generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), a condition characterized by constant worry and anxiety, finding relief is a constant battle. Some self-medicate to soothe their nerves and get through their routine by using harmful substances like alcohol, drugs, or nicotine.

Smoking rates for people with anxiety are almost double those for the general population.1 But does nicotine cause anxiety or relieve it? Here we explore the connection between nicotine and anxiety, also providing healthier coping options.

Despite widespread knowledge about the negative health effects of smoking, such as lung cancer and chronic pulmonary obstructive disorder, approximately 11.5% of the U.S. population smokes.2

The Link Between Nicotine and Anxiety

The link between nicotine and anxiety continues to be explored. Although, findings are mixed. While some studies suggest that nicotine can alleviate feelings of fear and anxiousness,3 other research shows the opposite: that smoking may lead to anxiety disorders.4

Particularly for those with GAD, smoking can worsen the anxiety.5 While it might help soothe the person in the moment, it can also increase their worries about money and health, contributing to severe and constant anxiety. Over time, this can exacerbate symptoms of anxiety.

How Does Nicotine Affect the Body?

Nicotine negatively affects the body in numerous ways. It:6

Increases the risk of cardiovascular, respiratory, and gastrointestinal disorders
Decreases the immune response
Increases oxidative stress
Increases cancer risk
Anxiety Relief from Nicotine Is Temporary

Many people turn to cigarettes when they are anxious since the physiological effects of nicotine can create a calming sensation. But nicotine only produces temporary anxiety relief and does not address the underlying cause of the feelings of anxiousness.

The anxiety eventually returns and, without doing something about them, they can start to worsen over time. This can create a cycle where people smoke to alleviate anxiety and then feel the need to smoke more to deal with anxiety when it returns.7

Recap

Nicotine can create temporary feelings of relaxation, but the many problems associated with smoking-including the high financial and health costs-can play a role in worsening anxiety over the long term.

Healthier Ways to Relieve Anxiety

People who use nicotine to self-medicate their anxiety should know that there are many treatment options available for GAD that are healthier and have long-lasting effects.8 First, seek out the advice of a medical professional. For those who don't know where to start, their primary care physician can refer them to a therapist specializing in anxiety disorders.

In therapy, individuals go over their anxiety symptoms and triggers, and then work to identify solutions to these issues. From cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) to dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), many methods are available to help.

In some cases, a physician may recommend an anti-anxiety medication to help manage the daily worry and stress. Medication is only a short-term solution for some people, but others may be on medication for months or even years. The length of time that medication is used is based on the person's condition and unique situation.

A person may need to start working on their anxiety before they attempt to quit smoking. Therapy can help them identify healthier coping skills they can use to gain relief. Then, they can work on quitting.

It's important for people to discuss smoking with their doctor. Suppose that the doctor suggests helping them quit while they still have high anxiety. In that case, the person might want to request a referral to a therapist who can assist them in managing the spike in anxiety they might experience when they stop smoking.

Nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) is one option that might help a person stop smoking and gradually reduce their nicotine use. Research suggests that using a quit-smoking aid such as a nicotine patch can increase the chances of quitting successfully by around 50 to 60%.9

Summary

Nicotine and other substances, such as alcohol, may seem like an easy way to self-medicate for anxiety. But each can have negative health consequences. Getting help for anxiety is a healthier and more effective way to get lasting relief.

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Does nicotine cause anxiety?

It may. While many people think that smoking can ease anxiety, studies suggest that the opposite may also be true. Research shows that nicotine may cause symptoms of anxiety or, at the very least, make them worse.4

What organ does nicotine target that results in changes to mood and anxiety?

The brain. Nicotine targets various neurotransmitters and neural pathways in the brain that play a role in mood and anxiety.10

Learn More: Brain Anatomy, Function, and Conditions
How long do the effects of nicotine last?

The body breaks down nicotine into many chemicals, including cotinine, which stays in the system longer than nicotine itself. Nicotine has a half-life of about two hours.11 The half-life is the amount of time it takes for half of a dose to be eliminated from the body.

Can quitting nicotine cause anxiety?

Nicotine withdrawal can lead to a range of symptoms and feelings, including anxiety. It is normal for people to start experiencing feelings of agitation, tension, and anxiety within 24 hours of quitting smoking.12

Learn More: 7 Common Nicotine Withdrawal Symptoms
Read More:
CONDITIONS A-Z
ANXIETY
GENERALIZED ANXIETY DISORDER
LIVING WITH
12 Sources
See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback