CONDITIONS A-Z ANXIETY
Social Anxiety Disorder
Also known as SAD
Symptoms and Diagnosis
Treatment and Therapy
Living With
 Medically reviewed by Akeem Marsh, MD Updated on August 22, 2023

Social anxiety disorder (SAD) is a mental health issue that involves a dread of social situations including performing or speaking in front of others for fear of being negatively judged. According to mental health experts, SAD impacts 7% of the U.S. population.1 Moreover, the United States Preventative Services Task Force recommends that adults under the of age 65 get regular screenings for anxiety.2

Although it's common for many people to experience nervousness or feel "butterflies" when facing certain social situations, people with SAD are extremely self-conscious and worry about what people think to the point that they often experience physical symptoms. These may include a rapid heart rate, sweating, blushing, nausea, shaking, and lightheadedness.

People with SAD often benefit from psychotherapy techniques, such as cognitive behavioral therapy. Medication is also recommended to help cope and take control of the situation.

LIVING WITH SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER
How to Overcome Eye Contact Anxiety
How Different Personality Types May Adapt to Life After COVID-19
8 Best Jobs for People With Social Anxiety Disorder
How to Improve Self-Esteem With Generalized Anxiety Disorder
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Do I have social anxiety or am I just shy?

Unfortunately, social anxiety disorder (SAD) is often dismissed as just extreme shyness. In general, the main symptoms that distinguish shyness from SAD are:

The impairment of functioning that it causes in a person's life
The intensity of the fear
The level of avoidance
Learn More: Shyness vs. Social Anxiety Disorder
Does social anxiety go away?

For most people, social anxiety does not go away on its own, but treatment for it has been found to be effective. Social anxiety that occurs in all situations responds best to a combination of medication and therapy, while therapy alone is often sufficient for people with anxiety specific to one type of performance or social situation.34 So, if you've been diagnosed or think you may have SAD, know that it's possible to overcome it.

Learn More: Treating Social Anxiety Disorder
Can social anxiety be cured naturally?

While alternative treatments such as yoga or dietary supplements are not a substitute for evidence-based treatments for social anxiety, you may find that they help with particular SAD symptoms by promoting feelings of calmness. Alternative medicines should be considered complementary to treatments proven effective for SAD such as cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT) and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).5

Learn More: Herbal Supplements Used for Social Anxiety
KEY TERMS
Anxiety Disorder
Phobia
Psychotherapy
SSRIs
Anxiety Disorder

An anxiety disorder is a serious mental health issue that causes a person to feel significant worries or fears.6﻿ Because these worries will not go away on their own, they may get worse over time and can interfere with daily activities without treatment.

Phobia

A phobia is a type of anxiety disorder that involves a persistent, excessive, and irrational fear of something like a situation, activity, object, person, or animal. Typically, people with phobias try to avoid the source of their fear; or if they cannot avoid the source, they may try to endure it even though they experience a great deal of stress and anxiety.

What Is a Phobia?
Psychotherapy

Psychotherapy is a process therapists use to treat mental health issues and psychological disorders. Through the use of different techniques and methods, a psychotherapist will help a client address psychological or life issues. While there are many approaches to psychotherapy, the overall goal is to help the client overcome problematic thoughts and actions.

How Psychotherapy Is Used
SSRIs

SSRIs, or selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, are a class of antidepressants commonly prescribed to treat a variety of mental health conditions including anxiety, depression, bipolar disorder, and more. SSRIs work by increasing serotonin levels in the brain, which is believed to help regulate mood and anxiety.

How SSRIs Are Used to Treat SAD
EXPLORE SOCIAL ANXIETY DISORDER
How to Overcome Social Anxiety Disorder, According to Psychologists
Are There Other Types of Social Anxiety?
Introversion vs. Social Anxiety: What's the Difference?
The 8 Best Online Psychiatry Services That Take Insurance, Tried and Tested
Asocial vs. Antisocial: What's the Difference?
Selective Mutism vs. Social Anxiety Disorder: What Are the Differences?
What Causes Social Withdrawal?
Is Anxiety Genetic?
An Overview of Mental Health Statistics 
What Is Destination Anxiety?
What Is Chronic Anxiety?
Symptoms of Social Anxiety Disorder
Social Anxiety Disorder Treatments
Living With Social Anxiety Disorder
Social Anxiety Disorder Causes, Symptoms, Treatment, and More
Avoidant Personality Disorder: Symptoms and Treatment
Is Impostor Syndrome Holding You Back From Living Your Best Life?
The Spotlight Effect and Social Anxiety
How to Deal With Blushing When You Have Social Anxiety Disorder
Do You Want to Be Invisible and Hide From People?
Why Do People With Anxiety Shake?
What Is Situational Anxiety?
An Overview of Attachment Anxiety
Understanding Rejection Sensitivity and How It Can Affect You
How Hormones Play a Role in Social Anxiety
7 Disorders Related to Social Anxiety Disorder
Understanding ADHD and Social Anxiety
Asperger's Disorder vs. Social Anxiety Disorder: What Are the Differences?
What Causes Social Anxiety Disorder?
What Is Selective Mutism?
The Relationship Between Agoraphobia and Social Anxiety
Passive Communication and Social Anxiety
What to Know About Overgeneralization
Negative Automatic Thoughts and Social Anxiety
What Is Maladaptive Behavior?
Comorbidities in Mental Health
What's The Difference Between Social Phobia and Social Anxiety Disorder?
Liebowitz Social Anxiety Scale (LSAS)
Does Social Anxiety Make You Scared of People?
Talking to Your Doctor About Social Anxiety
Differences Between Shyness and Social Anxiety Disorder
Social Anxiety Disorder in Children
The Difference Between GAD and Social Anxiety Disorder
Seroquel for Anxiety
Marijuana Use and Social Anxiety Disorder
5 Tips for Opening Up to a Therapist When You Have Social Anxiety
The Mental Health Benefits of Rhodiola
Neurolinguistic Programming for Social Anxiety Disorder
SUDs Rating Scale for Measuring Social Anxiety
How Is Valerian Root Used for Social Anxiety?
How to Practice Exposure Therapy for Social Anxiety Disorder
Zoloft for Anxiety
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Social Anxiety Disorder
Understanding Cognitive Restructuring
Why Kava Kava Shouldn't Be Used to Treat Social Anxiety
Lexapro (Escitalopram): What You Should Know
How Can GABA Be Used for Social Anxiety?
Why Xanax Is Prescribed for Social Anxiety Disorder Symptoms
The 4 Major Classes of Anxiety Medication
How to Practice Exposure Therapy for Paruresis
How Can Disputation Help Manage Social Anxiety?
Prozac for Anxiety Disorders
The Health Benefits of Passion Flower
More In Anxiety
Generalized Anxiety Disorder
Page Sources