LIVING WELL RELATIONSHIPS
Strengthening Relationships

Every relationship-romantic, platonic, workplace, or familial-has its own struggles. Resolving conflict and miscommunications? Definitely a doozy sometimes. Not to mention, working around the differing personality types, love languages, and attachment styles too. But there are methods to the madness that is lifelong romantic relationships and partnerships. Whether you're dating, in a relationship, or have been married for years, learn more about the many challenges of maintaining successful connections.

Is TikTok's Orange Peel Theory *Actually* a Helpful Way to Test Your Relationship?
Work Together with Your Securely Attached Partner to Tackle Your Anxious Attachment
Are Your Relationships Healthy? Here's How to Tell
Help! I Hate My Best Friend's Partner
Overcoming Feelings of Resentment in Your Relationships
Why Weaponized Incompetence Hurts Your Relationship, According to a Therapist
Dating Apps Can Be Stressful, Here's How to Deal
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
What builds a strong relationship?

There are a few tried-and-true methods that work to improve relationships: be a good listener, carve out time together, enjoy a quality sex life, and divvy up those pesky chores. Other things include spending time apart, fighting fairly, and practicing emotional vulnerability.

Learn More: 7 Surprising Ways to Make Your Relationship Even Better
How do I know if I'm in a healthy relationship?

No relationship is perfect, each having a mix of healthy and unhealthy characteristics. But some common signs of a healthy relationship include trust, openness and self-disclosure, healthy boundaries, mutual respect, good communication, and love and affection.

Learn More: How to Know If You Are in a Healthy Relationship
How can I improve communication in my relationship?

Healthy communication is the effective exchange of thoughts and feelings between people. It often involves people taking turns speaking and listening. Some effective communication skills include staying focused and alert during conflict, practicing active listening, seeing the opposite point of view, and responding with empathy instead of criticism.

Learn More: How to Improve Your Relationships With Healthy Communication
KEY TERMS
Attachment Styles
Introversion
Extroversion
Love Languages
Attachment Styles

Attachment styles are patterns that emerge in our earliest emotional bonds with caregivers. These early attachment styles play an important role in child development and also influence attachment patterns in adult relationships

4 Types of Attachment Styles
Introversion

Introversion is a personality trait characterized by a focus on internal feelings rather than on external sources of stimulation.

8 Signs You Might Be an Introvert
Extroversion

Extroversion is a type of personality characterized by talkativeness, assertiveness, and warmth.

How Extroversion in Personality Influences Behavior
Love Languages

The five love languages describe five ways that people receive and express love in a relationship. These are words of affirmation, quality time, physical touch, acts of service, and receiving gifts.

What Are the Five Love Languages?
EXPLORE STRENGTHENING RELATIONSHIPS
How Our 'Weak Ties' Actually Have a Super Strong Impact on Our Lives
Redditors Are Debating If It's OK to Test Your Partner-Here's What We Think
My Partner Isn't the Same Person I Fell in Love With-What It Means and How to Cope
How to Be a Better Friend, According to Therapists
Want the Secret to Lasting Love? Try These 20 Reddit-Endorsed Tips
Help! I Said "I Love You" Too Soon
10 Conversations You Should and Shouldn't Have Over Text
Why Do I Constantly Fear That My Partner Will Cheat on Me?
How Do I Deal With an Avoidant Friend?
How to Stop Atopic Dermatitis From Ruining Your Love Life
Can Three Be a Crowd? What Experts Say About Trio Friendships
8 Common Conversation Mistakes You Don't Know You're Making
Should I Mix My Friend Groups? Here's What a Relationship Coach Thinks
10 Signs Your Partner Is Quiet Quitting Your Relationship and What to Do About It
What the 'Broken Jewelry Theory' Might Tell You About Your Relationship
The Definitive Dos and Don'ts of Asking Where Your Relationship Is Going
Should I Be Worried If My Partner Is Still Friends With Their Ex?
5 Unusual Signs of Hidden Tensions in Relationships You Might Be Overlooking
How the Let Them Theory Can Transform Your Relationships
6 Ways to Tell Someone They're Being a Bad Friend, According to Therapists
How to Kick Your Bad Relationship Habits, From a Relationship Coach
8 Signs Your Partner Is Probably Mad at You-And What to Do About It
How to Build and Maintain Healthy Friendships After Divorce
25 Compliments Beyond Looks to Make Someone Feel Seen
How to Be Direct Without Being Perceived as Rude
How to Read People Like a Book, According to Body Language Experts
Family Drama Always Ruining the Holidays? These Psychologist-Approved Tips Can Help
Is Complaining Good For You? Therapists Explain
Your Relationship Can't Survive Without Boundaries-Here's How to Set Them
Worried You and Your Partner Are Sexually Incompatible? Watch Out for These Signs
30 Questions to Encourage Vulnerability in a Relationship, According to a Therapist
10 Ways to Show a Friend Some Tough Love, According to Therapists
Are Low Maintenance Friends Actually Good for Us or Are We Just Being Lazy?
Is the 2-2-2 Rule the Secret to Having a Healthy Long-term Relationship?
25 Conversation Starters to Get (and Keep!) Someone's Attention
30 Things to Say to Shut Down Intrusive Questions
How Men Can Have Stronger Friendships, According to a Therapist
Can a Relationship Between Two Type A Personalities Work?
6 Ways to Prevent Dooming Your Friendship When Traveling Together
Which Personality Types Are Most and Least Compatible?
60 Ways to End a Conversation Gracefully
Financial Compatibility Is an Understated Relationship Green Flag
How to Spot a Friend That Doesn't Have Your Best Interest at Heart
Yes, You Can Heal Your Mother Wound-Here's How
Relationship Tips in Five Words or Less, According to the Experts
Help! I'm Jealous of My Partner's Bestie
Foolproof Conversation Starters That Can Lead to New Friendships
Awkward! How Do I Start a Conversation at an Event Where I Don't Know Anyone?
How to Succeed in a Type A/Type B Relationship
Why Your Relationship Changes After 3 Years
Can a Relationship Between Two Extroverts Work?
How to Reconnect With Your Partner and Escape the Roommate Phase in Your Relationship
9 Tips to Help You and Your Partner Reconnect After a Relationship Break
How to Heal an Avoidant Attachment Style, According to a Relationship Coach
Should You Pay Closer Attention to Beige Flags in a Relationship?
Why You Need to Build Compersion in Your Relationships
Are You Still in Love, Or Is It Just Easier to Stay Married?
If You Want a Love That Lasts, Do These 5 Things
How to Understand Your Relationship Dynamics and the Patterns We Create
Can a Relationship Between Two Introverts Work?
How to Be Less Emotionally Reactive in Your Relationship
Have I Fallen Out of Love or Am I Depressed?
60 "How Well Do You Know Me" Questions to Improve Your Relationships
More In Relationships
Dating
Sex and Relationships
Toxicity and Abuse