PSYCHOLOGY
Student Resources
History and Biographies
APA Style and Writing
Study Guides and Tips
Careers

Perhaps you're looking to break into healthcare or supplement your psychology studies with information beyond the curriculum. These resources will acquaint students with how to read and comprehend journal articles, write and format papers using APA style, and learn about prominent figures and theories of psychology.

You'll also find insights that will help guide a career in healthcare. Learn which psychology career is right for you or see how you can apply your psychology studies to other fields of work.

Basic Rules for APA Format
What Is a Case Study in Psychology?
Psychology Research Paper Topics: 50+ Great Ideas
80+ Psychology-Related Careers to Consider
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
How do you read a psychology study?

Learning how to read this type of writing is mostly a matter of experience, but a few simple tactics can make this process much easier.

Understand the Structure of a Journal Article.
Skim Through the Article.
Take Notes on Each Section and Ask Questions.
Identify Key Information.
Note the Sources Cited.
Learn More: Reading Articles in Psychology Journals
What are reliable sources for psychology?

Encyclopedias, online reference sites, lecture notes, supplementary course readings, or your own class textbooks are all reliable sources of information. If you're taking your search online, databases such as PsycINFO, PsycNET, and EBSCOhost are helpful for finding journal articles on your topic.

Learn More: Full-Text Psychology Journal Articles
What can I do with a psychology degree?

Having a good understanding of the human mind and behavior can help you excel in a wide variety of career paths, not just those pertaining to psychology. Some include advertising or marketing, social work, career counseling, and writing.

Learn More: Careers in Psychology With a Bachelor's Degree
KEY TERMS
Psychology
APA Format
Variable
Correlation
Abstract
Psychology

Psychology is the study of the mind and behavior. It encompasses the biological influences, social pressures, and environmental factors that affect how people think, act, and feel.

What Is Psychology?
APA Format

The APA format is a set of citation and formatting guidelines developed by the American Psychological Association (APA). These guidelines provide writers with a consistent formula for acknowledging the works of others, notes on how to order, structure, and format a paper, as well as practical writing and grammar tips. APA format is used by students and professionals in a variety of disciplines, including business, economics, nursing, and, of course, psychology. 

How to Write a Paper in APA Format
Variable

A variable is something that can be changed or altered, such as a characteristic or value. Variables are generally used in psychology experiments to determine if changes to one thing result in changes to another.

Types of Variables in Psychology Research
Correlation

A correlation coefficient, often expressed as r, indicates a measure of the direction and strength of a relationship between two variables.

Correlational studies are quite common in psychology, particularly because some things are impossible to recreate or research in a lab setting. Instead of performing an experiment, researchers may collect data to look at possible relationships between variables.

What Is a Correlation?
Abstract

The abstract is the second page of a lab report or APA-format paper and should immediately follow the title page. Think of an abstract as a highly condensed summary of your entire paper. The purpose of your abstract is to provide a brief yet thorough overview of your paper.

How to Write an APA Abstract
EXPLORE STUDENT RESOURCES
Descriptive Research in Psychology
How Qualitative Data Is Used in Psychology
How Snowball Sampling Used in Psychology Research
Confounding Variables in Psychology Research
Convenience Sampling in Psychology Research
Understanding Socratic Questioning: A Comprehensive Guide
What Does Social Darwinism Say About Mental Health?
Box Plots in Psychology Research: Definition, Interpretation, How They're Used
How a Z-Score Can Help You Compare Data-Here's How to Calculate It
Charles Darwin: Biography, Theories, Contributions
How Bloom's Taxonomy Can Help You Learn More Effectively
Information Processing Theory in Psychology
Understanding Factor Analysis in Psychology
How Much Does a BCBA Make?
How to Write an Outline in APA Format
Skills You Need for Psychology
Classes to Take in High School for Future Psychology Majors
Developmental Psychology Topics
Differences Between a B.A. and a B.S. in Psychology
Psychology Questions About Personality
10 Things We Can All Learn From Psychology
What Is an Algorithm in Psychology?
Good Minors for Psychology Majors
How Do Cross-Sectional Studies Work?
Double-Blind Studies in Research
Understanding Stimulus Discrimination in Psychology
What Is a Correlation?
What Is an Aptitude Test?
A Simple DIY Short-Term Memory Experiment
Full-Text Psychology Journal Articles
6 Alternative Graduate Programs for Psychology Majors
5 Types of Psychology Degrees
Achievement Tests
What Is a Dependent Variable?
Why Are Statistics in Psychology Necessary?
Master's in Counseling Degree Options and Career Paths
Why Is Psychology Such a Popular Major?
What Is a Control Group?
How Hard Is Intro Psychology?
Time Management for Psychology Students
Why Are You So Anxious During Test Taking?
The Benefits of Taking a Psychology Class
Ideas for Psychology Experiments
What to Know About a Master's in Psychology
Getting a Ph.D. in Psychology
How Long Does It Take to Get a PhD in Psychology?
10 Psychology Courses You Can Take Online
10 Reasons to Major in Psychology
Social Psychology Research Topics
Reasons Not to Major in Psychology
The 8 Best Psychology Books for Students
Clinical Psychology Research Topics
What You Can Do with a PsyD (Doctor of Psychology
Master's in Psychology Prerequisites
Signs and Symptoms of Test Anxiety
Considerations for Online Master's Degree in Psychology
How to Become a Research Psychologist
Types of Therapy Degrees for Different Careers
How Color Affects Reading Comprehension
Health Psychology Topics
Demand Characteristics in Psychology Experiments
Psychology Podcasts for Students
Advanced Placement (AP) Psychology
More In Psychology
Theories