LIVING WELL RELATIONSHIPS
Toxicity and Abuse

Words like "narcissism" and "toxicity" are thrown so causally around nowadays. But how much do we actually know about toxicity and abuse? Not just what TikTok or Twitter has told us. Are they a narcissist or just a jerk? What does gaslighting even look like in the workplace? Is reactive abuse even a real thing? If you need the answers to these questions (or more), look no further. Learn what abuse means, how to identify it, and how to keep yourself safe.

What Is Rape Trauma Syndrome?
How to Leave an Abusive Relationship Safely
This Is Why It's So Hard to Leave an Abusive Relationship
When Someone Gaslights You, Say These 9 Things to Shut Them Down
What Are The Types of Domestic Violence?
Domestic Violence in the LGBTQ+ Community
Spotting Abuse By Proxy
FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
Are toxicity and abuse the same?

Not all toxic relationships are abusive; however, all abusive relationships can be considered toxic.

In a toxic relationship, there is usually a lack of respect and a violation of boundaries. Sometimes, this behavior occurs without the person even realizing they're doing it.

But, if this kind of behavior is consistently repeated with the active intent to harm the other person, the relationship could be considered abusive.

Abuse can take many forms-such as psychological, emotional, and physical abuse.

Learn More: What to Know If You're Concerned About a Toxic Relationship
What are the signs of a toxic relationship?

Every relationship is different and may change over time. A relationship can start out very healthy and slowly turn into something you need to fix (or get out of). And there are some important qualities that tend to characterize unhealthy relationships. These qualities are control, disrespect, poor communication, and lack of trust.

Learn More: Signs You Might Be In an Unhealthy Relationship, And What to Do
What are the different types of abuse?

Domestic abuse can take many forms. These are some of the different types of domestic abuse: physical, sexual, neglect, emotional or psychological, financial, cultural identity abuse, technological, and immigration abuse.

Learn More: Domestic Abuse: Types, Causes, and Impact
KEY TERMS
Domestic Abuse
Gaslighting
Narcissism
Reactive Abuse
Trauma Bonding
Domestic Abuse

Domestic abuse, also known as domestic violence or family abuse, is a pattern of behavior that is used to hurt, terrorize, manipulate, or gain control over a family member

https://www.verywellmind.com/domestic-abuse-types-causes-and-impact-5324104
Gaslighting

Gaslighting is a form of emotional abuse because it can cause someone to doubt their own sanity, says Kristin Wilson, MA, LPC, CCTP, RYT, chief experience officer at Newport Healthcare. It's a form of emotional manipulation and abuse because it causes the person on the receiving end to question their reality. Gaslighting can come in the form of lies, denial, and other insidious means.

Gaslighting Examples and How to Respond
Narcissism

Narcissism, or narcissistic personality disorder (NPD), is a diagnosable personality disorder characterized by behavioral patterns like grandiosity, lack of empathy, and the chronic need for admiration.

What Is Narcissistic Personality Disorder (NPD)?
Reactive Abuse

Someone who is being abused might eventually reach their breaking point and lash out at their abuser in return. This is known as reactive abuse.

Reactive abuse occurs when someone who has been abused begins to defend themselves by responding to abuse with physical and/or verbal attacks, says Alexa Connors, LMSW, a senior therapist at The Dorm, which offers intensive trauma therapy for young adults.

Understanding Reactive Abuse: Signs and Solutions
Trauma Bonding

Trauma bonding is the attachment an abused person feels for their abuser, specifically in a relationship with a cyclical pattern of abuse.

Understanding Trauma Bonding
EXPLORE TOXICITY AND ABUSE
What to Know About Being in a Relationship With an Alpha Male
Yes, You Can *Safely* Leave a Narcissist-Here's How
"The Penny Method" Is the Latest Toxic Dating Trend-Here's What to Know
What "It Ends With Us" Gets Wrong About Domestic Violence
How to Manipulate or Disarm a Narcissist When You're in Danger
Divorcing a Narcissist: How to Survive the Legal and Emotional Challenges
10 Signs of a Toxic Friend (and How to Break Up With Them the Right Way)
4 Early Signs of Coercive Control
The Manipulative Tactics of Narcissists: Hoovering Explained
6 Signs of a Serial Cheater, According to a Psychiatrist
How Narcissists Use Future Faking to Manipulate You Into a Relationship
Use These 10 Phrases to Disarm a Narcissist
How Childhood Emotional Neglect Can Show Up in Our Adult Life
Gaslighting Examples and How to Respond
Understanding Reactive Abuse: Signs and Solutions
How Narcissists Use DARVO to Avoid Accountability
Signs of Narcissistic Collapse and What to Do Next
Echoism: The Narcissism Response You Haven't Heard of
5 Reasons Why You Can't Let Go of Resentment, According to Therapists
Do Narcissists Cry-And If So, Is It Legit?
Communal Narcissism-Understanding Collective Self-Centeredness
Am I Being Gaslighted? Take the Quiz
Understanding and Healing From Emotional Incest
Can You Be Addicted to a Person?
How to Recognize the Signs and Types of Manipulative Behavior
What Does the Term 'Emotional Baggage' Mean?
What Is Slut-Shaming?
What Does It Mean to Be Hyposexual?
Signs of Emotional Abuse From Parents
Religious Abuse: Spotting the Signs and How to Cope
Understanding Intimate Partner Violence
Domestic Abuse: Types, Causes, and Impact
How to Find a Narcissistic Abuse Support Group
How to Find Domestic Violence Classes
How to Avoid Falling Into a Narcissistic Relationship Pattern
Healing From Narcissistic Abuse
Effects of Narcissistic Abuse
Child Abuse: Signs, Types, Impact
What Are the Different Types of Bullying?
Understanding Trauma Bonding
Mental Health Effects of Different Types of Abuse
How to Deal With Verbal Abuse
What Are the Most Common Types of Child Abuse?
What Is Mandated Reporting?
What to Know About Hypersexuality
4 Unmistakable Signs of Sexual Tension
What Is Chemistry in a Relationship?
How to Deal With Stalkers
Sexual Assault and Victim Blaming
How to Stop Being Codependent
The Potential Benefits of a BDSM Relationship
How to Cope With Sexual Assault
How to Tell Someone You Were Sexually Assaulted
What to Do if You've Been Raped
The Sexualization of Young Girls and Mental Health Problems
How to Recognize and Cope With Verbal Abuse
The #MeToo Movement: History, Sexual Assault Statistics, Impact
Behind the Keyboard: Spotting Digital Dating Abuse
Understanding the Effects of Childhood Trauma
Can Hypnosis Bring Back Repressed Childhood Abuse Memories?
What Is Childhood Sexual Abuse?
False Domestic Abuse Claims and Divorce
Signs a Relationship Could Turn Violent or Deadly
More In Relationships
Dating
Sex and Relationships
Strengthening Relationships