CONDITIONS A-Z PHOBIAS
Types of Phobias
Certain phobias are more prevalent than others. Gain a better understanding of both common and rare phobias so you're best equipped to manage your fear.
Xanthophobia (Fear of the Color Yellow): What You Need to Know
Ephebiphobia (The Fear of Teenagers): Signs, Causes, How to Cope
What to Know About Atelophobia (Fear of Imperfection)
What Are the Rarest Phobias?
Decidophobia-Understanding the Fear of Making Decisions
Fear of Spending Money (Chrometophobia)
Living in Fear of the Future: What to Do
How to Cope With the Fear of Change
How to Deal With the Fear of Failure
Is Anatidaephobia a Real Condition?
Understanding the Fear of Crowds (Enochlophobia)
Nomophobia: The Fear of Being Without Your Phone
Coping With the Fear of Hair, aka Trichophobia
Gynophobia: The Fear of Women
Thalassophobia (Fear of the Ocean): Symptoms and Ways to Cope
10 of the Most Common Phobias
Understanding Cleithrophobia, or the Fear of Being Trapped
What Is the Fear of Sex (Erotophobia)?
Understanding Anthrophobia, the Fear of People
The Fear of Water or Aquaphobia
Helping Your Child With the Fear of Death
What Is Haphephobia?
What Is the Fear of Demons (Daemonophobia)?
Coping With Teraphobia or the Fear of Monsters
6 Ways to Cope With the Fear of Traveling
Is Stage Fright Considered a Phobia?
Coping With Angrophobia or the Fear of Anger
Scopophobia: The Fear of Being Stared At
Necrophobia: Coping With the Fear of Dead Things
Olfactory Reference Syndrome Characteristics and Treatment
Separation Anxiety in Children
Anemophobia: The Fear of Wind
Symptoms and Factors of Dementophobia
The Fear of Witchcraft or Wiccaphobia
Fluoxetine Interactions, Side Effects, and Warnings
Understanding Puerto Rico Syndrome or Ataque de Nervios
Xenophobia: The Fear of Strangers
What Is Dysmorphophobia?
Taijin Kyofusho, A Culture-Bound Social Phobia
Fear of Intimacy: Signs, Causes, and Coping Strategies
Paraphobia Symptoms and Treatment
What Is Nyctophobia? (Fear of the Dark)
Arachnophobia
What Is Astraphobia?
Understanding Ornithophobia (Fear of Birds)
What Is Cibophobia (Food Phobia)?
Coping With Coulrophobia Symptoms
Coping WIth Koro or the Fear of Genital Retraction
Ablutophobia Causes and Treatments
What Is Automatonophobia or Fear of Human-Like Figures?
Understanding Astrophobia, The Fear of Space
What Is Amaxophobia?
What Is Arachibutyrophobia? (Fear of Peanut Butter)
Understanding the Fear of Smelling Bad (Bromidrophobia)
How to Cope With Dystychiphobia
Coping With Siderodromophobia, or the Fear of Trains
What Is Hexakosioihexekontahexaphobia?
Coping With Cynophobia or the Fear of Dogs
Nosophobia or Fear of a Disease
Genophobia or the Fear of Sexual Intercourse
Herpetophobia and Its Treatment
Fear of Haunted Houses
Fear of Going to the Dentist aka Dentophobia
More In Phobias
Treatment