5 Things People Do in the First 10 Minutes of Their Day That Make a Big Difference

Some unexpected updates to the morning routine

By Julia Childs Heyl, MSW Updated on May 28, 2025

Tara Moore / Getty Images

Table of Contents
You Can Talk to Your Pets
You Can Embrace a Spiritual Interest
You Can Sit in Complete Silence
You Can Look Out the Window and Get Some Sun
You Can Take Some Time to Be Creative
How to Take Your Mornings to the Next Level

We all know that how you start your day matters, and morning rituals have become a cornerstone of overall wellness. It isn't uncommon to hear everyone from your boss to celebrities herald their morning routines as a reason they're successful. Though drinking hot lemon water, exercising, and meditation are the typical morning go-tos, we became interested in hearing more about the uncommon routines people do in those precious first ten minutes of the morning. 

We talked to five different people with widely varying occupations, ranging from a writer to massage therapist to professional skateboarder.. Some of their morning rituals were unique twists on tried-and-true go-tos, while others were ones we had never considered. Read on to get some inspiration on how to revamp your mornings.

You Can Talk to Your Pets

Joey*, a writer we talked to, shared that their morning routine is simple: They drink coffee and talk to their cats. "I think that because I spend a lot of my day on my computer looking at the screen for writing and stuff, it's lovely to start my day interacting with these sweet furry creatures," they explained.

Watching them play while Joey drinks coffee isn't only a respite from the inevitable screentime Joey faces-they also named an element of humor they find particularly uplifting. "They make me laugh. Cats are very funny, so there's also something grounding about enjoying the humor of it all." This sweet morning ritual isn't just a cute moment they share with their pets. Laughter is actually proven to lower cortisol levels, too.1

You Can Embrace a Spiritual Interest

Lily is a creative director and astrologer. When it comes to prepping for her day during the week, she relies on classic methods like drinking hot lemon water and going for a long walk with her dog. However, she digs into a different routine on the weekends. "I usually like to start my leisurely days with a spiritual mental component," she shares. She'll light a candle, pull a tarot card, and journal.

Then, her final step is to review the day's astrological aspects. "It feels great to start my day like this because there is a depth to it that I really love," she continued. It's important to note that Lily uses astrology as a supportive tool to understand how she might experience the day, but she doesn't use it as an end-all be-all oracle.

The point is to use it as a tool for self-reflection and consideration of what's to come. Using astrology to try to predict the future or relying on astrological aspects as definitive information can increase stress. As with all things, moderation is key.2

You Can Sit in Complete Silence

Leeann is a massage therapist. This means her job isn't only physically demanding, it can be emotionally taxing too. That's why she observes a period of complete silence in the morning. She's not meditating, reading, drinking coffee-she is just still. This practice was prompted by her partner's needs.

Her partner, who is also a massage therapist, wakes up and cleans their entire home. It helps her start the day with a clean slate. She also prefers quiet while she cleans. This led Leann to quietly be with herself in the mornings, and she realized it is the perfect dynamic for them and the perfect practice for her. "Being in a client-based business, you're constantly chatting. I have to adjust myself to other people's tone and that can be exhausting," she shared. Her quiet mornings refill her cup so she seldom feels depleted at the end of the day.

You Can Look Out the Window and Get Some Sun

This next one is for those who don't fancy themselves morning people. It is well known that getting some sun in the morning can increase melatonin production and make for much better sleep in the evening. Some people hold to this and make sure they get outside every single morning. But there is another set of people who would love to go for a morning walk but can't seem to get out of bed early enough to do so. If you fall into that category, then this suggestion is for you.

Mike, a retired professional skateboarder, isn't a morning person. He lives in a condo, so he doesn't have a backyard he can walk out into to get the sun in his eyes. Instead, he brushes his teeth, drinks a large glass of water, and stands in the sun by the brightest window. By staring into the light, he finds himself getting more energy. Sure, going outside and getting light with no interference from the window is probably ideal, but let's call this the next best thing.3

Also, we should clarify that the benefit of sunlight on your eyes does not mean looking directly at the sun, which can blind you.

You Can Take Some Time to Be Creative

Katie, a writer and producer, is doing all the right things in the morning: Meditation, water, and exercise. She also dedicates one to two hours of her mornings to writing.

While some may focus on journaling and gratitude lists, Katie focuses on her creative projects, like a feature film she's penning. "I feel like I get a little dopamine boost," explains Katie as she speaks about why she loves writing in the morning. "It makes me much happier because I've carved out time for my creative work," she continued. 

How to Take Your Mornings to the Next Level

Every person we interviewed had this one thing in common: They all found a unique way to meet a key personal need.

Joey noticed the screen fatigue setting in and opted for some early morning laughter, courtesy of their cats. Lily prefers an introspective and spiritual approach to her days, so she draws the astrology chart for the day. Leanna is still recharging from her clients from the day before, so silence, without the pressure of meditation, is key. Not a morning person? Mike found a solution. Katie made the stereotypical practice of writing in the morning all her own.

To level up your mornings, tap into what you feel the most depleted by at the end of the day. Maybe it is socializing, or not having time for a creative project, or not being able to sleep. Whatever it is, see how you can counteract that with one simple act you do first thing in the morning. Use that as the foundation for your new and improved morning routine. 

*All names have been changed

Read More:
LIVING WELL
SELF-IMPROVEMENT
3 Sources

By Julia Childs Heyl, MSW
Julia Childs Heyl, MSW, is a clinical social worker and writer. As a writer, she focuses on mental health disparities and uses critical race theory as her preferred theoretical framework. In her clinical work, she specializes in treating people of color experiencing anxiety, depression, and trauma through depth therapy and EMDR (eye movement desensitization and reprocessing) trauma therapy.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback