Dads & Mental Health Survey Guide 
How Postpartum Depression Affects Dads

PPD in Dads Often Goes Undiagnosed

By Sarah Sheppard Updated on August 07, 2023
 Medically reviewed by Ann-Louise T. Lockhart, PsyD, ABPP

SDI Productions/E+/Getty

Postpartum depression is a form of depression that occurs after the birth of a child. While it's often experienced by mothers, it can also be experienced by fathers.

Men may not experience the pain of childbirth or need physical recovery, but the presence of a new child is a major life change. Fathers, like mothers, need to pay attention to their mental health. Exhaustion and stress, in addition to other factors, can lead to male postpartum depression.

A 2023 survey of US dads conducted by Verywell Mind and Parents found that 9% of men experienced postpartum depression, and another 12% said both they and their spouses struggled with PPD. While reported rates in women are certainly higher (30% in the same survey), it's clear that men are not immune.

The Effects of Postpartum Depression

Feeling exhausted, overwhelmed, and stressed following the birth of a child is a normal aspect of parenthood. Still, if symptoms persist or if they interfere with daily life or the ability to care for the child, then it could be postpartum depression. This is true for both mothers and fathers.

Many postpartum depression symptoms are synonymous with a major depressive disorder. Symptoms vary from person to person. You may experience some, not all, and they can vary in degree. 

For men experiencing paternal depression, these are some common symptoms:

A significant change in appetite 
Weight change
Inability to sleep
Unexplained aches or pains
Loss of energy
Feeling restless or agitated
Loss of interest or pleasure in activities 
Feeling sad or hopeless
Feeling worthless or guilty
Excessive worrying
Inability to concentrate or make decisions
Sudden changes in mood
Thoughts of suicide or death 
Intrusive thoughts of harming the baby

Irritability, indecisiveness, and a limited range of emotions are also common symptoms experienced by men with postpartum depression.1

The Underdiagnosis of PPD in Men

Women are often screened by their doctor for postpartum depression, but men typically aren't. They are also more likely to underreport their symptoms,1 which is why postpartum depression in men can go undiagnosed and untreated.

If you're a new father experiencing persistent and ongoing symptoms of depression, you'll want to notify your partner, doctor, and/or mental health professional. Depression doesn't go away on its own, so the sooner you're diagnosed, the sooner you can begin treatment and relieve symptoms.

The diagnostic process may include clinical questioning, often using the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition, Text Revisions (DSM-5-TR), and/or the Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS). The healthcare professional will rule out physical conditions that could cause depression or other underlying mental health conditions before making a diagnosis.

Because there's a stigma associated with men and their mental health, especially when it comes to postpartum depression, it's important for men to speak up and seek professional help when symptoms arise and especially when those symptoms continue for an extended period of time. 

Treating Postpartum Depression

Treatment for postpartum depression is similar to treatment for clinical depression. Depending on your situation and the severity of your depression, you may be prescribed medication, therapy, or a combination of both.

As of August 4, 2023, the Food and Drug Administration approved Zuranolone as the first oral treatment for postpartum depression. Zuranolone is a once-a-day medication for postpartum depression taken over two weeks.2

Serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are also commonly used medications for postpartum depression.3 Antidepressants and other medications may be considered for men with postpartum depression.

If the medication causes unwanted side effects or if the depression worsens, you'll want to notify your healthcare provider to make adjustments or find alternative treatment options.

Cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and interpersonal therapy (IPT) are psychotherapies known to relieve symptoms of postpartum depression, but most men prefer individual or couples therapy which can help relieve symptoms.1

No matter the preferred treatment, men can benefit from support groups or educational classes, especially if they're partner is also suffering from postpartum depression or if they're lacking support from friends, family, or community members. For best success, father-tailored models of care should be considered.4

How Common Is PPD in Men?

Supporting the results of the Verywell Mind and Parents survey, prior research has shown that about 8% of fathers experience paternal depression.5 Unfortunately, many cases of postnatal depression go undiagnosed in men, so early diagnosis and intervention are important for the health of the father and the family.

Many factors can contribute to the development or worsening of postpartum depression, including but not limited to:

History of depression or anxiety 
Other mental health concerns, such as substance misuse
Low or lack of social support 
Low income or financial stress 
Relationship with mother
Postpartum depression in mother
Young paternal age
Living in a separate household from the child

Postpartum depression can manifest differently for men than women. Extending work hours, withdrawing from the family, or losing interest in activities could all be signs that mental health support is needed. 

The Effects of Ignoring Male Postpartum Depression

Narratives around the experience of postpartum depression often exclude men, even though fathers can and do experience the disorder. When male postpartum depression goes undiagnosed, it can harm the whole family. 

A father's depression can impact the child's development and increase the child's risk of developing a psychiatric disorder in early childhood.6

Following the birth of a child, fathers experience hormonal changes, says Hannah Tishman, LCSW at Cobb Psychotherapy, and they often feel heightened pressures related to finances and their career.

The focus of the household also changes, impacting new fathers. Before having a child, the man may have been the primary focus of their partner, Tishman explains, but this changes, and the mother often bonds quickly with the child and this can make the father feel left out. Adding in lack of intimacy, lack of sleep and guilt around the inability to bond with the baby can make fathers feel worse.

Fathers don't often get the same support as mothers following the birth of a child and may experience feelings of resentment, neglect, or unreasonable gender expectations.7

Like mothers, fathers need a strong support system throughout the perinatal period and in the early stages of parenthood. 

Coping With PPD

When men suffer from postpartum depression, it can impact their ability to function and properly care for their partner and child. 

In addition to maintaining healthy self-care habits, which can include meditation or therapy, Tishman recommends:

Exercising regularly
Eating healthy foods
Maintaining healthy sleep habits
Talking about and expressing feelings

For men, it may be difficult to ask for help, especially when their partner is going through so many changes and needs their support.

While it's important to care for your partner and child following childbirth, fathers need to recognize their own mental health needs and find healthy ways to cope with symptoms of depression. Talking to a therapist or joining a support group of other fathers can help. 

If you are having suicidal thoughts, contact the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 988 for support and assistance from a trained counselor. If you or a loved one are in immediate danger, call 911.

For more mental health resources, see our National Helpline Database.

Male postpartum depression can go undiagnosed for many month, but it is treatable. If you're a new father experiencing symptoms of depression, talk to your primary care physician or a mental health professional.

If your loved one expresses concern over your mental health, then it's important to seek professional help so you can better care for yourself, your partner, and your new child.

Read More:
CONDITIONS A-Z
DEPRESSION
TYPES
7 Sources

By Sarah Sheppard
Sarah Sheppard is a writer, editor, ghostwriter, writing instructor, and advocate for mental health, women's issues, and more.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback