7 Reasons Why You Need a Work Bestie

Work besties might just be the secret to loving your job

By Wendy Rose Gould Published on June 20, 2024

Vadym Pastukh / Getty Images

Table of Contents
What Is a Work Bestie?
7 Benefits of Having a Work Bestie
How to Find and Keep a Work Bestie

Even if you absolutely love your job, you can't deny that it comes with some challenges. Maybe the routine feels a little mundane, or perhaps you've got the opposite problem and things never seem to slow down. Oh, and you can't forget about the inevitable workplace stressors, drama, and challenging interpersonal dynamics. 

Talking about work with a friend or partner is great, but nothing compares to having a work bestie who just gets it. But what is a work bestie anyway, and how can you achieve this type of relationship? Let's get into it.

9 Ways to Cope With Work Stress and Avoid Burnout
What Is a Work Bestie?

A work bestie is a coworker who's your go-to for laughs, venting, and support. They're your office BFF who makes the daily grind way more fun and bearable. And because you two work together, you better understand each other and all the nuances of your workplace.

They are the person who you feel seen by. You know you've found them when you want to run to them with the latest office gossip or to celebrate your work wins.

- RHIA BATCHELDER, CAREER COACH

"A work bestie is someone you can be yourself with, which can be rare in the professional world," says Rhia Batchelder, a burnout expert and career coach. "They are the person who you feel seen by. You know you've found them when you want to run to them with the latest office gossip or to celebrate your work wins." 

She adds that we naturally hold back the more personal parts of ourselves in workplace environments. This is totally OK, but we are so much more than professionals. Work besties are the unique friends who get to see all aspects of us-the professional and personal.

"Work besties are the ones you can be silly with, say what you truly think with, and run to for support," Batchelder says. "You know work besties will keep your secrets and they'll be there when you need to [vent] about a coworker."

Characteristics of a Work Bestie
Trustworthy
Supportive
Reliable
Transparent
Collaborative
Non-judgmental
Motivating
Respectful
Understanding
7 Benefits of Having a Work Bestie 

Work besties hype you up to colleagues and leadership, serve as your go-to lunch buddy, and help you navigate work drama. Best of all, they can turn even the toughest of workdays into something lighter.

They Just Get It

Work besties are different from our regular friends because they see what you do all day, which creates an additional layer of understanding. "We spend so much time at work, and it feels so good to be able to chat with someone who truly 'gets' your daily work life, knows the main characters, and can give you on-point advice for any issues you're experiencing," Batchelder says.

They'll Hype You Up to Others

Having a bestie baked into the workplace comes in clutch when promotions or special projects are up for grabs. This colleague-friend knows your specific skills and talents, and they can recommend you with authenticity and pride. They'll also be the first to shout out your big and small accomplishments.

They Cut Back Stress Levels

Research has shown that friendships and community are key to managing stress levels. A work bestie takes this to the next level because of how often you see them and how much you understand each other's professional lives. 

"Work besties are burnout prevention," Batchelder says. "Spending time with people we do not have to perform around is a great way to complete the stress cycle, which is essential for the high-stress lifestyles we lead today." 

What Is the Stress Cycle?

The stress cycle is how our body responds to stress. There are three main stages: alarm, resistance, and exhaustion. Some ways to complete the stress cycle include physical activity, crying, laughing, creativity, deep breathing, rest, and physical comfort.

They'll Give Genuine Feedback

Having a best friend to talk to when work stuff feels extra tense-like when a project goes sideways or your boss is challenging-is incredibly beneficial. Because they understand the nuances of your workplace (and they have your trust), they can provide you with helpful feedback and a unique perspective on what truly matters. 

You Can Freely Vent About Work

There's only so much venting about work that people outside of your job can handle. A work bestie, though? They're just as invested as you! Not only is venting together cathartic, but it can also help you identify and work through specific problems, so you're better able to enjoy work over the long haul.

They're Accountability Buddies

Work best friends are great accountability partners at the office, Batchelder says. They'll be the first to encourage you to ask for a raise, take that much-needed vacation, or go outside during the day for a walk or a nice lunch. You can provide the same for them, as well. In fact, a 2022 study found that when we help others our well-being improves. If that's not motivation to become a work bestie-and get your own-then what is?

They Make Work More Fun

Work besties inject fun into the workplace by cracking inside jokes, being a buddy during work events, and collaborating on projects with enthusiasm. They turn mundane tasks into opportunities for fun, offer moral support during tough times, and create a positive atmosphere that boosts morale and fosters productivity.

50 Deep Questions to Ask Your Friends for Juicy Conversations
How to Find and Keep a Work Bestie

Meeting a work bestie and nurturing that relationship takes some effort. You should feel naturally drawn to this person and want to spend time together, whether that's engaging in quick banter during a coffee break or eating lunch in your office's cafe. Here's how to build on the momentum and foster a fulfilling friendship. 

Hang After Hours: Invite them to hang out outside work, so you can have some free time to get to know one another better. 
Celebrate Wins: Take time to celebrate your bestie's work and life wins, whether that's a promotion, pay raise, award, special acknowledgment, or life milestone. 
Talk About Other Stuff: "It's great to be able to chat about work together, but also make sure that your conversations span to other topics that you would discuss with your regular friends," Batchelder says. "That way, you can build a relationship that is based on more than work and will last even if one or both of you leave your current job." 
Support Each Other: A benefit of having a work buddy is that you have a built-in cheerleader and feedback giver. Support each other in the office by lending an empathetic ear, recommending each other for fitting opportunities, and offering gentle feedback to help the other grow.

Overcoming Challenges in Work Bestie Relationships

As with any friendship, disagreements or complicated feelings are bound to surface. For example, one person may feel slighted if they're denied a promotion or a raise over the other.

Committing to open communication, using kind words, and understanding their position to solve conflict will strengthen your bond. Also, recognize each other's differences and do your best to celebrate your and your bestie's successes.

Having an office bestie is a benefit, no matter what type of work you do. Take care to nourish this type of relationship and you'll enjoy the rewards immediately and for years to come.

Read More:
LIVING WELL
RELATIONSHIPS

By Wendy Rose Gould
Wendy Rose Gould is a lifestyle reporter with over a decade of experience covering health and wellness topics.

See Our Editorial Process
Meet Our Review Board
Share Feedback