Your Back-to-Basics Mental Health Toolkit

The path to feeling better starts here

By Team Verywell Mind Updated on May 08, 2025

Have you been feeling off but can't pinpoint exactly why? Does something in your life need to shift in order for you to achieve your goals or feel more grounded? Oftentimes, a big factor in getting stuck on our mental health journey is not knowing where to start. We feel bogged down by the pressure of mustering up our motivation, and option paralysis sets in. Whether you're in a lingering funk or considering seeking a diagnosis, we have all asked ourselves: How do I start feeling better?

You could seek support from a therapist-that could very well be what you need-but you'd be surprised how effective making some behavioral changes can be when it comes to improving your mental health. We take a lot of the building blocks of mental wellness for granted, which is why this Mental Health Awareness Month, we're bringing it back to basics. 

We take a lot of the building blocks of mental wellness for granted, which is why this Mental Health Awareness Month, we're bringing it back to basics. 

Rather than focusing on the notion of treating something specific, our goal is to equip you with tools you can whip out every single day-or any time you wake up feeling not quite yourself. We've compiled some of our favorite expert-approved articles and resources across five categories-meditation, movement, mind hacks, food, and human connection-that will help you take action toward better mental health. 

Take our quick and easy quiz to get a better sense of what mental health tool you should try first. It doesn't actually matter what result you get on the quiz because anyone can benefit from every single one of the articles below. That said, we believe having a recommended jumping-off point can make all the difference.

When you get your results, go ahead and scroll down to the matching category and start checking out your options. There's much to explore!

Meditation & Mindfulness
8 Types of Meditation to Find Your Calm
5-Minute Video Meditation for Starting Fresh
How Bedtime Meditation Can Help Turn Your Brain Off at Night
How to Self-Soothe With Mantra Meditation
How You Should Meditate, According to Your Personality
How to Calm Down Quickly: 9 Things You Can Do Right Now
Movement
The Mental Health Benefits of Physical Exercise
Here's How to Optimize Your Daily Walk and Get Those Mental Health Benefits
How Dancing Helps Your Mental Health
13 Benefits of Yoga for Your Mind and Body
Mind Hacks
75 Ways to Boost Your Mood Right This Very Second
5 Self-Compassion Exercises to Practice Daily
How the 3-3-3 Rule for Anxiety Can Calm Your Mind
How to Be More Confident: 9 Tips That Work
What to Do When You Have No Motivation
Food & Supplements
Feel Good Foods: The Diet-Brain Connection
Mindful Eating Can Help You Be More Present and Relaxed at Mealtime
I Cut Out Sugar for a Month-Here's What It Did for My Mental Health
The Mental Health Benefits of Vitamin B Complex
Human Connection
9 Ways to Combat Loneliness and Build Connections
Why Third Places Are Essential to Creating Community in Modern Society
I Have No Friends: Here's What to Do If You Feel This Way
5 Tips to Help You Date More Mindfully
Strengthen Friendships With Good Listening Skills
50 Deep Conversation Starters for Meaningful Connections
Read More:
LIVING WELL
SELF-IMPROVEMENT