Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Green Beans with Tofu and Crushed Peanuts
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Green Beans with Tofu and Crushed Peanuts
Green Beans with Tofu and Crushed Peanuts
Recipe courtesy of Harvard University Dining Services
Serves 4
Ingredients:

1 pound fresh green beans
8 ounces extra firm tofu
2 tablespoons olive oil
1-inch slice of fresh ginger, peeled and sliced thin
Zest and juice of 1 lemon
1 clove garlic, finely chopped or minced
1 tablespoon red chili pepper flakes
¼ cup plain, roasted peanuts
Preparation:

Preheat oven to 350 degrees Fahrenheit. Cut tofu into 1-inch pieces and toss gently with 1 tablespoon of the olive oil. Spread the oil-coated tofu in a single layer on a baking sheet and roast in the oven until lightly browned, approximately 15 minutes. Turn with a spatula half-way through to ensure equal browning. When done, remove from the oven and set aside.
Meanwhile, steam the green beans in a medium-size pan on the stove top until tender but slightly crispy, then shock immediately in cold water. Drain and set aside.
Warm 1 tablespoon of olive oil in a sauté pan. Once heated, add the garlic and ginger, stirring to mix them together. Cook until mixture is tender, but do not burn the garlic. Add zest and chili flakes and stir again; cook for about 1 minute. Add green beans and toss to cover with garlic and ginger. Add in the tofu pieces, tossing the mixture again.
Splash with lemon juice, toss again, taste, and season. Remove to warm serving platter and sprinkle the top with crushed peanuts.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/4 of recipe220 calories11 grams of protein13 grams of carbohydrates5 grams of fiber10 milligrams of sodium14 grams of fat( 2 grams of saturated fat8 grams of monounsaturated fat4 grams of polyunsaturated fat)
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.