Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Asparagus with Warm Tarragon-Pecan Vinaigrette
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Asparagus with Warm Tarragon-Pecan Vinaigrette

Try this sparkly dish as an appetizer all on its own, so it can get the full attention it deserves.

Asparagus with Warm Tarragon-Pecan Vinaigrette
Recipe courtesy of Mollie Katzen
Cook Time 15-20 min.
Serves 4-6
Ingredients:

1½ pounds fresh asparagus (medium-thick)
2 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
2 teaspoons sugar or light-colored honey
2 tablespoons olive oil
1 cup minced pecans
2 teaspoons minced or crushed garlic
½ teaspoon salt (or to taste)
1 to 2 tablespoons minced fresh tarragon (or 2 teaspoons dried)
Freshly ground black pepper
Preparation:

Break off and discard the tough bottom ends of the asparagus, then slice the stalks on the diagonal into 1½-inch pieces. Set aside.
Combine the vinegar and sugar or honey in a small bowl and mix until uniform. (You might need to warm the honey for about 10 seconds in a microwave if it’s too stiff.) Set aside.
Place a large, deep skillet over medium heat. After about a minute, add 1 tablespoon of the olive oil, and swirl to coat the pan. Add the pecans, turn the heat down, and sauté over medium-low heat for about 10 minutes, or until the nuts are fragrant and lightly toasted. Watch them carefully so they don’t burn. Transfer the nuts to another dish and set aside.
Return the pan to the stove, and increase the heat to medium-high. Wait about a minute, then add another tablespoon olive oil and swirl again to coat the pan. Toss in the asparagus, and stir-fry for about 3 to 5 minutes, or until the asparagus is just barely tender. (Thicker asparagus will take longer.) Sprinkle in the garlic and salt during the last minute or so of cooking.
Turn up the heat to high, and pour in the vinegar mixture, stirring as you go. Stir-fry over high heat for only about 30 seconds, then remove from heat.
Stir in the tarragon, and add black pepper to taste. Serve hot, warm, or at room temperature, sprinkled with the reserved pecans.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/6 of recipe189 calories3 grams of protein7 grams of carbohydrates3 grams of fiber200 milligrams of sodium18 grams of fat( 2 grams of saturated fat11 grams of monounsaturated fat5 grams of polyunsaturated fat)

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.