Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Strawberry Rhubarb Crisp
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Strawberry Rhubarb Crisp

Of all the foods we eat, fruit contributes the least amount of sodium to the average American’s diet, yet most Americans fall short of the goal of eating three or more servings of fruit a day. One strategy for incorporating more fruit into your diet is to eat fruit for dessert, or to create desserts that are mostly fruit. This dessert is an example of this strategy. Each serving of this dessert provides a full serving of fruit. The addition of whole grains, nuts, and olive oil make this a very satisfying dessert your family and guests will enjoy.

Strawberry Rhubarb Crisp
Recipe courtesy of The Culinary Institute of America
Cook Time 35 - 40 min.
Serves 12
Ingredients:

6 cups fresh or frozen rhubarb (about 1 ½ pounds), cut into ½-inch pieces
3 cups fresh strawberries, quartered
¼ cup light brown sugar
2 teaspoons finely grated lemon or orange peel
1 cup old-fashioned oatmeal
½ cup almond flour or finely ground almonds
½ cup brown sugar
1/3 cup whole wheat flour
6 tablespoons unsalted butter, melted
3 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil
Preparation:

In a large mixing bowl combine the rhubarb, strawberries, brown sugar, and lemon or orange zest. Toss well so all of the fruit is covered in sugar.
Spread the fruit into an even layer on the bottom of a 9-inch by 13-inch ceramic or glass baking dish.
In a medium mixing bowl combine oatmeal, almond flour, brown sugar, whole wheat flour, melted butter, and olive oil. The mixture should be crumbly. Use a large spoon to sprinkle this mixture over the fruit.
Bake at 350 degrees Fahrenheit for 35 to 40 minutes, until the topping is browned and the fruit is soft. Serve warm with a small scoop of vanilla yogurt or ice cream.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/12 of recipe210 calories3 grams of protein23 grams of carbohydrates4 grams of fiber6 milligrams of sodium320 milligrams of potassium15 milligrams of cholesterol

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.