Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Spanish Romesco Sauce (Red Pepper and Almond Sauce)
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Spanish Romesco Sauce (Red Pepper and Almond Sauce)

Many people call Romesco sauce “Spanish ketchup.” This sauce is a wonderful accompaniment for grilled vegetables, chicken or fish. It also makes a great sandwich spread.

Spanish Romesco Sauce (Red Pepper and Almond Sauce)
Recipe courtesy of Joyce Goldstein
Serves 10
Ingredients:

2 ancho chiles, medium, or 1 rounded teaspoon ancho chile powder
1 cup almonds, blanched, or skinned hazelnuts, toasted, or combination of both
4 garlic cloves, large, minced
1 bell pepper, large red, roasted, seeded peeled, chopped
1 cup tomato, peeled, seeded, diced, fresh or canned
1 tablespoon smoked sweet pimenton pepper or sweet paprika
½ teaspoon smoked hot pimenton pepper or cayenne pepper
3 tablespoons red wine or sherry vinegar
1 teaspoon salt
¾ cup extra virgin olive oil
Preparation:

If using whole anchos, soak the chiles in hot water and cover for about 1 hour. Drain, remove the stems and seeds and cut into small pieces. Transfer the chile pieces, or ancho chile powder, if using, to a food processor along with the nuts, garlic, roasted pepper, tomatoes, pimenton, vinegar, and salt.
Pulse a few times to make a chunky paste. Start adding the oil a tablespoon at a time until the mixture emulsifies. Taste. We are looking for sweetness from the peppers, nuttiness, and acidity.
Add salt if necessary to bring up the flavors. Let the sauce rest for 15 minutes for the flavors to come together, taste again and then decide if you want it spicier, saltier, or more vinegary, and adjust accordingly. The sauce keeps, tightly covered, in the refrigerator for up to 6 months. If the oil has risen to the top you may want to re-emulsify it in the food processor, or you can remix it back to a smooth consistency with a small whisk.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/10 of recipe240 calories4 grams of protein6 grams of carbohydrates2 grams of fiber320 milligrams of sodium24 grams of fat( 3 grams of saturated fat18 grams of monounsaturated fat3 grams of polyunsaturated fat)
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.