Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Couscous-Quinoa Tabouli
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Couscous-Quinoa Tabouli

Try this variation on the traditional Mediterranean green-and-grain salad. It’s different and delicious, with the addition of a few non-traditional spices—and it’s a great way to slip some of that nutritious wonder-grain, quinoa, into your diet.

Couscous-Quinoa Tabouli
Recipe courtesy of Mollie Katzen
Serves 6 to 8
Ingredients:

1 cup uncooked quinoa
1 cup uncooked instant couscous
¾ cup boiling water
2 teaspoons cumin seeds
1 teaspoon coriander seeds
2 cups (packed) minced fresh parsley (flat or curly-leaf)
1 cup minced fresh mint
3-4 scallions, finely minced
1 cup minced red onion (about 1 small onion)
1 or 2 small (6-inch) cucumbers, peeled, seeded if necessary, and diced
1 heaping teaspoon minced garlic
½ teaspoon cinnamon
½ teaspoon salt (possibly more to taste)
Freshly ground black pepper to taste
4-6 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
3 or more tablespoons fresh lemon juice (to taste)

Optional garnishes

Tiny cherry tomatoes, for garnish (cut in half if not really tiny)
A few toasted walnuts, minced
Toasted pita bread
Preparation:

Place the quinoa in a strainer and rinse under cold running water. Transfer to a small saucepan, add 1¼ cups water, and bring to a boil. Cover, turn the heat way down, and simmer for 20 minutes. Remove from heat, and fluff thoroughly with a fork to let heat escape. Set aside. (Continue to fluff the quinoa from time to time as you prepare the other ingredients, so the grains stay dry and separate.)
Place the couscous in a medium-large bowl, and add the boiling water. Cover with a plate and let stand for 10 minutes. Remove the plate, and fluff with a fork as you did with the quinoa. Then add the quinoa to the couscous, and fluff mightily. (It’s very important to the texture of this dish that the grains be separate and “tender-dry.” They will borrow moisture from the other ingredients, and you don’t want the salad to turn to mush.)
Meanwhile, lightly toast the seeds in a small dry skillet over medium-low heat until they are fragrant. Cover and stir often, so they don’t burn. Transfer to an electric spice grinder or a mortar and pestle. Grind to a powder, and add this to the cooked grains. Set the bowl aside until the grains have cooled at least to room temperature.
When the grains have cooled, use a fork to stir in all the remaining ingredients except the optional garnishes. Cover tightly and chill for at least 2 hours before serving.
Serve cold, topped with cherry tomatoes and/or minced walnuts, and with some toasted pita bread on the side, if desired.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/6 of recipe, excluding optional garnishes350 calories9 grams of protein50 grams of carbohydrates6 grams of fiber220 milligrams of sodium13 grams of fat( 2 grams of saturated fat9 grams of monounsaturated fat2 grams of polyunsaturated fat)

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.