Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Staying Active > Active Communities
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Active Communities

A growing body of research suggests that an individual’s physical surroundings, or what scientists call “built environments,” have a large influence on his or her level of activity. [1]

People are more likely to be active if they live near parks and playgrounds, in neighborhoods that have sidewalks or bike paths, or close enough to work, school, or shopping that they can travel by bike or on foot. People are less likely to be active if they live in neighborhoods without recreation facilities or in sprawling suburbs designed for driving.

Moving to another neighborhood is not a viable option for most people. Instead, communities need to create built environments that make it easier for people to incorporate physical activity into their daily lives. [2, 3] Local and state leaders control budgets, zoning, and a variety of regulations that shape our physical surroundings, and there are many strategies communities can use to promote safe environments for activity: [2, 3]

Improving access to parks, walking and biking paths, community gardens, and other outdoor recreation facilities
Creating attractive sidewalks and so-called “cycle tracks,” barrier-protected and bicycle-exclusive facilities alongside sidewalks
Curbing traffic so that people feel safer walking and cycling
Building schools within easy walking distance of where people live
Improving public transportation to encourage more people to use it
Changing zoning rules to allow “mixed-use development”—if communities allowed homes, stores, schools, offices, and other buildings to be built close to each other, people would be more likely to walk or bike from place to place, rather than hop in the car
Making neighborhoods safer to encourage people to be active outdoors
Allowing community residents to use schools for recreation, after school hours

Individuals can help by becoming advocates for change, and also by pitching in. Volunteer to clean up a local park, join a neighborhood crime watch, start a petition to add crosswalks along a popular walking route, or to turn parking spaces into cycle tracks along busy streets.

References
Sallis, J.F. and K. Glanz, Physical activity and food environments: solutions to the obesity epidemic. Milbank Q, 2009. 87(1): p. 123-54.
Khan, L.K., et al., Recommended community strategies and measurements to prevent obesity in the United States. MMWR Recomm Rep, 2009. 58(RR-7): p. 1-26.
Institute for Local Government. Action Strategies Toolkit: A Guide for Local & State Leaders Working to Create Healthy Communities & Prevent Childhood Obesity  Accessed 12/13/2024.

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.