Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Legumes and Pulses
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Legumes and Pulses

The Fabaceae or Leguminosae (commonly known as the legume, pea, or bean) family is the third largest family of flowering plants, consisting of over 20,000 species. [1] Legumes are a nutritious staple of diets around the world. They are an inexpensive source of protein, vitamins, complex carbohydrates, and fiber.

Although used interchangeably, the terms “legumes,” “pulses,” and “beans” have distinct meanings. A legume refers to any plant from the Fabaceae family that would include its leaves, stems, and pods. A pulse is the edible seed from a legume plant. Pulses include beans, lentils, and peas. For example, a pea pod is a legume, but the pea inside the pod is the pulse. The entire legume plant is often used in agricultural applications (as cover crops or in livestock feed or fertilizers), while the seeds or pulses are what typically end up on our dinner plates. Beans in their various forms (kidney, black, pinto, navy, chickpeas, etc.) are just one type of pulse.

Legumes are emphasized by the U.S. Dietary Guidelines (about 3 cups a week) and the DASH Eating Plan of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (4-5 half-cup servings a week). [2] The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations declared the International Year of Pulses in 2016, focusing on the contribution of pulses in food production and nutritional diversity to help eradicate hunger and malnutrition. [3]

Source Of
Protein
Folate
Fiber (both insoluble and soluble)
Iron
Phosphorus
Polyunsaturated and monounsaturated fatty acids including linoleic and oleic acids 
Legumes and Health

Legumes contain several components that, when eaten as part of a balanced plant-rich diet, may help prevent the development of various chronic diseases:

Cardiovascular disease
Cancer
Digestive health
Diabetes
Obesity
What about products made from legumes?
Because of their texture, flavor, and nutritional profile, legumes are found in numerous products throughout the supermarket. While these can include classic options such as tofu, peanut butter, and hummus, legumes and their components are also a key ingredient in a wide range of plant-based meat alternatives. Because this product mix relies on varying degrees of processing, consumers should be on the lookout for added sodium, sugar, saturated fat from tropical oils, or other additives. The Nutrition Facts Label and ingredients list can be useful tools in deciding when to include a  processed food in the diet.
For Your Health and The Planet’s Health

Food production places an enormous demand upon our natural resources, as agriculture is a major contributor to climate change, deforestation, species extinction, and freshwater depletion and contamination. However, along with varying impacts on human health, different foods also have differing impacts on the environment. Generally, the production of plant-based foods tends to have lower greenhouse gas emissions, and use less land and water than producing animal-based foods. In transitioning towards healthy diets from sustainable food systems—especially with our global population slated to reach 10 billion by 2050—legumes are slated to play a key role. The 2019 EAT-Lancet report that outlines a “planetary health diet” recommends 50 grams of legumes (about ¼ cup) in the daily diet. [14]

Legumes have a range of characteristics that make them a relatively sustainable crop. For example, legumes release up to seven times less greenhouse gas emissions per area compared to other crops, and can sequester carbon in soils. They can also make their own nitrogen from the atmosphere, thus reducing the application of nitrogen fertilizers. This leaves nitrogen-rich residues in the soil after harvesting; a benefit for the next crop planted in its place. [1] According to the FAO, drought-resistant species of legumes can be of particular benefit to dry environments where food security is often a challenge. They can also help minimize food waste, since pulses can be dried and stored for relatively long periods of time without losing their nutritional value. [15]

Bottom Line

Despite their wide variety, legumes share many common benefits. They are relatively sustainable and inexpensive, a low glycemic index food, rich in protein and fiber, and satiating. Because of their “meaty” texture, legumes can even stand in for animal-based protein foods in a variety of preparations. Additionally, their generally neutral flavor makes them versatile to blend well with other ingredients and pair easily with a variety of seasonings.

Learn more about some specific legumes, including a variety of ways to incorporate them into your meals:

Chickpeas (Garbanzo Beans)
Whichever name you call them, explore these versatile legumes; a staple of diets worldwide.
Lentils

Lentils are one of the earliest domesticated crops, seen in the diets of ancient Rome and Egypt. Learn more about this staple legume.

Soy
Soy is a unique and widely studied food. Examine the research behind this nutrient-dense source of plant protein.
References
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.