Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Food Features > Brussels Sprouts
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Brussels Sprouts

Brussels sprouts are named after Brussels, Belgium, where it is believed they were first widely cultivated in the 16th century. Sometimes called mini cabbages, they have appeared on “most hated vegetable” lists due to their potentially bitter flavors caused by sulfur-containing compounds. Overcooking the vegetable, particularly by boiling, will intensify any bitter flavors and unpleasant odors. However, when properly cooked and seasoned, Brussels sprouts offer a natural, nutty sweetness.

In the U.S. the majority of Brussels sprouts are grown in California, though they can likely be found at your local farmers markets. They are available throughout the year but peak growing season is in the fall through early spring.

Source Of
Vitamin C
Vitamin K
Folate
Carotenoids (beta-carotene, lutein, zeaxanthin)
Fiber
Brussels Sprouts and Health

Brussels sprouts fall into the Brassica oleracea family of cruciferous vegetables that also includes broccoli, cauliflower, cabbage, kale, and collard greens. Cruciferous vegetables contain a sulfur-containing phytochemical called glucosinolate, which is responsible for the distinctive odor and bitter flavor. Cooking and digestion break down glucosinolates into compounds called isothiocyanates that have been researched for their anti-cancer effects, such as protecting cells from DNA damage and preventing new blood vessels from growing in tumor cells.[1-3]  However, there is no direct evidence that Brussels sprouts have anti-cancer effects in humans, and some evidence has suggested that they may increase the risk of pancreatic cancer.[4] While we wait for further evidence, it makes sense to eat them no more than once per week, varying our diet with the many options of cruciferous vegetables such as broccoli, cabbage, and cauliflower.

Make

Purchase Brussels sprouts that are bright green with tightly compacted leaves. Yellow or wilted leaves are signs of aging and deterioration. They can last 3 to 5 weeks at a freezing temperature of 32 F, and about 1 to 2 weeks refrigerated. Longer storage may cause discoloration, black spots on the leaves, wilting, and decay.[5] Older Brussels sprouts also tend to produce stronger odors.

Rinse Brussels sprouts under cool running water to remove any debris. Slice off the tough bottom stems and remove any outer discolored leaves.

Roasted: Halve the Brussels sprouts and arrange cut-side-down in a single layer on a baking sheet lined with parchment paper or in a baking dish. Drizzle with olive oil and pinch of salt. Roast in a preheated oven at 400 F until browned on the exterior and tender on the inside. Smaller Brussels sprouts (about 1” in diameter) should be roasted for 18 minutes, while those 1.5” in diameter or larger may take 20-25 minutes. (Learn more about the science behind roasting cruciferous vegetables.)

Steamed: Fill the bottom of a pot with 2 inches of water. Cover and bring to a boil. Place cleaned and trimmed Brussels sprouts in a steamer basket and insert into the pot. Turn heat to medium, cover pot, and allow to cook for 6-8 minutes or until just tender. Allow steam to escape by uncovering pot every few minutes to release the strong sulfur compounds.

Shaved: Slice Brussels sprouts in half lengthwise. With cut side down, slice into thin rounds and then separate the leaves into shreds with your fingers. These can be used in salads or a quick sauté with a little olive oil.

Serve
Add 1 cup of shaved Brussels sprouts to any salad, soup, or stew.
Mix cooked Brussels sprouts with nuts (sliced almonds, walnuts, or pecans) and dried fruit (currants, raisins, or diced apricots).
Season cooked Brussels sprouts:
Drizzle with olive or sesame oil and a squeeze of lemon juice
Sprinkle a finely grated tangy cheese such as Parmesan or Pecorino
Drizzle with a combination of ¼ cup of balsamic vinegar and 1-2 tablespoons honey or maple syrup
Garnish with basic, chives, parsley, or thyme
Brussels sprout chips: Peel away single leaves of Brussels sprouts and arrange on a baking sheet lined with parchment paper or foil. Drizzle with olive oil and roast at 375 F for 15-20 minutes or until browned and crispy.

More recipe ideas and serving suggestions featuring Brussels sprouts:

Roasted Brussels Sprouts
Roasted Brussels Sprouts with Shallots in Walnut Oil
Three Green and Wheat Berry Salad with Mushroom “Bacon”
Did You Know?

Some grocery stores sell Brussels sprouts attached to their tall stalks. They not only look grand but help to prolong freshness as the stalks nourish the sprouts post-harvest and help to retain their moisture longer than loose sprouts.

Related
Science of Flavor: Cruciferous Vegetables
Fruits and Vegetables
References

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.