Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Frequently Asked Questions
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Frequently Asked Questions

“I would like to edit the Healthy Eating Plate or Healthy Eating Pyramid text to better suit my population. OR – I would like to translate the text of the Healthy Eating Plate or Healthy Eating Pyramid into a different language.”

Harvard owns the rights of the Healthy Eating Plate and Healthy Eating Pyramid. You cannot modify or translate the text in any way. If you would like to request permission to use an unmodified version of the Healthy Eating Plate or the Healthy Eating Pyramid, please submit this form. With the information from these forms, we can process your request.

“I recently heard that dairy/eggs/fish/saturated fat/brown rice is less/more healthy than your website suggests. I am so confused by the contradicting research, and I would love to know what I should really be eating! Should I include this food in my diet?”

“I was recently diagnosed with diabetes/heart disease/celiac disease/lactose intolerance, and I noticed that your website does not have special dietary information for my disease. Can you please advise me about how to eat a healthy diet with my disease?”

Thank you very much for your interest in The Nutrition Source. We appreciate your concerns about your diet, and we aim to update the website with diet information for the general public as frequently as possible. However, we are unable to provide personal nutrition advice. If you would like to contact a licensed nutrition professional to obtain such advice, the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics lists registered dietitians on its website.

“I just read an article that stated that a particular food item is extremely unhealthy or healthy. Your website does not discuss this! What do you think?”

Unfortunately, our website currently does not have any articles or information on the topic you have raised, but we will keep your interest in mind as we consider topic updates in the future.

“I am emailing to link you to my new book/website/blog/product/weight loss supplement, or food item. We would love to form a partnership with you and would appreciate a link to our product added to your website.”

Thank you very much for your interest in The Nutrition Source. We do not form partnerships with or endorse any brands because we do not have corporate sponsors, so we would be unable to offer that on our website. As you can see in our terms of use: “The information does not mention brand names, nor does it endorse any particular products.” Best of luck with your venture.

 

 

HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.