Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Healthy Workplaces
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Healthy Workplaces

Approximately 130 million full-time American workers spend over one-third of their day, five days per week engaged with their place of employment. [1,2] Due to the number of people reached and the amount time spent in these settings, creating healthy worksite programs, policies, and environments have the potential to positively impact workers’ health. [3,4]

Diet-related chronic diseases are among the health conditions that contribute to direct medical costs and lost productivity to U.S. employers, including heart disease, hypertension, and diabetes. [3] Worksite wellness programs primarily focus on improving health, increasing productivity, and reducing insurance costs. [4]

What about remote and hybrid workers?
The number of people physically located in their workplace has decreased substantially since the COVID-19 pandemic because more people are working from home. One survey from spring 2022 found that 58% of Americans reported having the opportunity to work from home at least one day a week; 35% reported having the option to work from home five days a week. [5] Nevertheless, effective workplace programs and policies utilizing a multidisciplinary approach can help reduce health risks and improve the quality of life for their employees. [3]
Worksite Wellness Programs

Worksite wellness programs have used a variety of mechanisms to promote health. Programs can be offered to the entire workplace, or specifically targeted to high-risk individuals.

Best practices for worksite wellness

Employers offer multifaceted nutrition and physical activity programs and initiatives. [2,4,6] Programs would include components such as:
Employee steering committees
Nutrition classes and seminars
Promotional and educational materials
Health risk assessments
Goal setting and lifestyle skills
Group exercise sessions
Signage to promote stair use
Increased availability of healthy foods and nutrition labeling in worksite cafeterias
Employers offer nutrition counseling to help individuals learn skills and gain support needed to improve eating and food preparation habits. Counseling includes self-monitoring, overcoming barriers to selecting healthy foods, goal setting, shopping and food preparation, and social support. [2,7]
Healthy Work Environments

Additional best practices for creating healthy eating and physical activity environments in the workplace

Utilize pricing and point-of-purchase strategies to promote healthier choices in cafeterias and vending machines. [8-15]
Development of healthy food and beverage procurement policies for cafeterias, vending machines, concessions stands, and/or for food provided at meetings, conferences and other organizational events. [2,8-10,16]
Create initiate incentive-based walking programs for employees. [8,9]
Initiate employee wellness programs that includes promoting use of stairs and walking trails, and targeting healthy eating. [8,9]
Related resources
Related
Healthy Food Environment
Active Communities
Stress and Health
References

Last reviewed January 2022

HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.