Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Pan Roasted Wild Mushrooms with Coffee and Hazelnuts
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Pan Roasted Wild Mushrooms with Coffee and Hazelnuts

One of the best parts about autumn is the appearance of wild mushrooms. A sudden dip in temperature coupled with excess moisture is enough to coax these fungi out of hiding. Hen of the woods, porcinis, chicken of the woods, oyster mushrooms, and chanterelles are just a small sampling of the varieties available—free of charge—to the discerning woodland forager. But even if you aren’t trained to mushroom-hunt on your own, wild mushrooms tend to pop up in markets when cooler weather approaches.

Here is a simple recipe that highlights the natural nutty, earthy qualities of wild mushrooms. Pan-roasting results in crispy edges but tender, juicy interiors. To complement the earthy and savory notes of these mushrooms, we make a quick sauce of coffee and soy sauce. The bitterness of the coffee brings out the bitterness of the mushrooms, so that the mushrooms taste even more…well, mushroom-y. To provide some textural contrast and sweet, buttery notes, we add in toasted hazelnuts, plus a nice dusting of grated hazelnuts for that fancy, restaurant-quality vibe. For best results, look for varieties such as hen of the woods, chicken of the woods, oyster mushrooms, or butter oyster mushrooms. For the sauce, a light to medium roast coffee works best; dark roasts tend to be too bitter for this application.

Pan Roasted Wild Mushrooms with Coffee and Hazelnuts
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves 2
Ingredients:

1/4 cup brewed coffee
1 1/2 teaspoons soy sauce
1 teaspoon honey
3/4 teaspoon cornstarch
3 tablespoons vegetable oil
10 ounces wild mushrooms, separated into 2- to 3-inch pieces
Salt and pepper
¼ cup toasted hazelnuts, chopped, plus extra whole for serving
Preparation:

Whisk coffee, soy sauce, honey, and cornstarch in small saucepan until combined. Bring mixture to simmer over medium heat, stirring occasionally, until sauce is clear, slightly thickened and coats back of spoon, 1 to 2 minutes. Cover and set aside. 
Heat oil in 12-inch skillet over medium-high heat until shimmering. Add mushrooms and cook until first side is golden brown, 3 to 4 minutes. Using tongs, flip mushrooms and cook until mushrooms are heated through and lightly browned, about 3 minutes longer. Season mushrooms with salt and pepper to taste.
To serve: Spoon coffee sauce on plate and sprinkle with chopped hazelnuts. Arrange mushrooms on top and grate extra hazelnuts over mushrooms. Serve.
Nutrition facts:
2375 calories9 grams of protein12 grams of carbohydrates2 grams of fiber4 grams of sugar( 3 grams of added sugar )377 milligrams of sodium495 milligrams of potassium36 grams of fat( 4 grams of saturated fat5 grams of monounsaturated fat14 grams of polyunsaturated fat)
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.