Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Moroccan Chicken Stew with Apricots
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Moroccan Chicken Stew with Apricots

Rich warm spices and sweet dried fruit make this Moroccan stew an instant favorite. Although traditional spice mixes rely on ground ginger and turmeric, the fresh roots add a bright flavor that can’t be matched. The combination of sweet and savory in this sauce makes it a great companion to almost any protein. (See more recipes from Always Delicious). 

Moroccan Chicken Stew with Apricots
Prep Time 10 minutes (plus overnight marinating)
Cook Time 1 to 1.5 hours
Serves 4
Ingredients:

For the Moroccan Sauce:
1 (2‑inch) piece fresh ginger, peeled and sliced into thin rounds
3 medium cloves garlic
1 (3‑ to 4‑inch) piece fresh turmeric, peeled, or 1 teaspoon ground turmeric (optional)
2 teaspoons paprika
1 teaspoon ground cumin
1 teaspoon ground coriander
1/4 teaspoon ground cinnamon
1/4 teaspoon ground cloves
Dash of freshly grated nutmeg
1/4 teaspoon ground white or black pepper
9 or 10 sprigs cilantro, stems and leaves coarsely chopped
1/4 cup extra-virgin olive oil
1/4 cup water
1/2 teaspoon salt
Dash of cayenne pepper, or to taste (optional)
For the Chicken Stew:
Moroccan Sauce (Ingredients above))
1 1/2 pounds boneless, skinless chicken thighs, cut into 1‑inch cubes or slices
1 to 2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
1 medium onion, diced
2 medium carrots, cut into chunks (about 1 cup)
1 small sweet potato or 1/2 small winter squash, cut into 1‑inch pieces (about 1 1/2 cups)
6 dried apricots, whole or diced, or 4 fresh apricots, quartered and pitted
1/4 cup water
1/4 teaspoon salt
Preparation:

Make the sauce: Place all the ingredients in a wide-mouthed mason jar or cup that will fit an immersion blender without splashing. Blend, working the blender in the jar until the garlic, ginger, and turmeric are smooth. Place a lid on the jar. For best results, set aside for at least 1 hour to allow the flavors to develop. The sauce will keep in the refrigerator for up to 2 weeks.
Marinate the chicken: Place the sauce in a large zip-top bag, add the chicken, seal the bag, and massage to completely coat the chicken with the sauce. Place it in the refrigerator to marinate for at least 1 hour and up to overnight (or cook it immediately if you have less time).
Prepare the stew: Heat the olive oil in a Dutch oven or stovetop-safe slow cooker insert over medium heat, or in a slow cooker on the sauté setting. Add the onion and cook, stirring, until translucent, 3 to 5 minutes.
Stir in the chicken and sauce from the bag, carrots, sweet potatoes, apricots, water, and salt. Cook, stirring, for 5 to 7 minutes. Reduce the heat to low, or transfer the ingredients or the slow-cooker insert to the slow cooker. Cover and simmer for at least 30 minutes or up to 1 1/2 hours on the stovetop (longer, slow cooking creates a more savory dish) or cook on low in a slow cooker for up to 8 hours or according to the manufacturer’s instructions. If desired, remove the lid for the last 15 to 30 minutes to thicken the sauce.
Serve hot (stew pictured over Cauliflower Couscous).

Recipe from Always Delicious by David Ludwig, MD, PH & Chef Dawn Ludwig. Published by Grand Central Life & Style. Copyright © 2018 David Ludwig, MD, PH & Dawn Ludwig.

HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.