Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Cardamom Roasted Cauliflower
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Cardamom Roasted Cauliflower

Roasting cauliflower and other vegetables create a sweet, caramelized flavor. This recipe uses a variety of spices and fresh lemon juice to create intense, craveable flavors that make this one of the most memorable vegetable side dishes imaginable!

Cardamom Roasted Cauliflower
Recipe courtesy of Suvir Saran
Cook Time 1 hr.
Serves 8
Ingredients:

1/3 cup extra virgin olive oil + 2 teaspoons for oiling the baking dish
1 teaspoon whole cardamom seeds
3 dried red chiles
1 tablespoon coriander seeds
1 teaspoon cumin seeds
½ teaspoon whole black peppercorns
1 2 ½ to 3 pound head of cauliflower, cored and cut into florets
1 medium red onion, peeled, halved and thinly sliced
½ teaspoon kosher salt
Juice from one lemon
Preparation:

Preheat your oven to 425 degrees Fahrenheit. Oil a 9”x13” baking dish with 2 teaspoons of olive oil and set aside.
Grind the cardamom, chiles, coriander, cumin, and peppercorns in a coffee grinder or small food processor until fine. Mix the spices with the olive oil in a large mixing bowl.
Add the cauliflower and onions and toss to coat with the spice-oil mixture. Transfer the vegetables to a baking dish and roast until they are tender, about 1 hour, stirring every 20 minutes. Sprinkle with kosher salt and a squeeze of lemon and serve.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/8 of recipe140 calories4 grams of protein12 grams of carbohydrates5 grams of fiber200 milligrams of sodium615 milligrams of potassium9 grams of fat( 1 grams of saturated fat7 grams of monounsaturated fat1 grams of polyunsaturated fat) 5 milligrams of cholesterol

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.