Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Cozy Red Lentil Mash
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Cozy Red Lentil Mash

Even though this is a called a “mash,” you don’t have to do any actual mashing. One of the beautiful things about red lentils (which are actually orange, but cook up to be yellow, so the name is confusing) is that they inadvertently mash themselves. Very thoughtful of them to pitch in.

Simmer the lentils well ahead of time. This will take about 20 to 30 minutes. While they are simmering, start cooking the onions. The onions need to be very well done in order for this dish to achieve its highest potential.

You have the option of “spiking” the olive oil with butter, which will give the dish a richer, more complex flavor. This is also perfectly fine without the butter—something vegans will be glad to know.

Cozy Red Lentil Mash
Recipe courtesy of Mollie Katzen/Harvard University Dining Services
Serves 4 as a main dish, or 6 as a side dish
Ingredients:

1-2 tablespoons olive oil (use the lesser amount if adding butter)
2 teaspoons unsalted butter (optional)
3 cups minced sweet onion
2 cups uncooked red lentils
5 cups water
1 teaspoon salt
2-3 tablespoons balsamic vinegar
Black pepper, to taste
Cayenne (if desired)
Preparation:

Place a large, wide skillet over medium heat and wait 1 minute. Add the olive oil and swirl to coat the pan. Add the butter, if using, and let it melt into the olive oil. Then add the onions, shaking the pan to make sure they are distributed over the heated oil. Cook over medium heat, stirring occasionally, and adding ½ teaspoon salt any time after the first 5 minutes or so.
Meanwhile, combine the lentils and water in an uncovered pot or kettle. Bring to a boil, lower the heat to a simmer, and let it cook undisturbed over the lowest possible heat until all the lentils are soft (approximately 10 to 30 minutes). To insure against burning the bottom, you can insert a heat-absorber underneath.
After the onions have cooked for about 30 minutes, douse them with 2 tablespoons of the vinegar, mixing it in as you go. When the onions are very soft, and very sweet (about a few minutes later), add the lentils, stirring them in to combine well.
Remove from the heat, and taste to adjust salt (it will need more) and vinegar (I usually end up adding another tablespoon or so).
Season with black pepper and cayenne, and serve hot, warm, or at room temperature. This stores well in a tightly sealed container in the refrigerator, and reheats beautifully in the microwave.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/4 of recipe450 calories27 grams of protein66 grams of carbohydrates15 grams of fiber610 milligrams of sodium6 grams of fat( 2 grams of saturated fat4 grams of monounsaturated fat) 5 milligrams of cholesterol
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.