Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Hearty Whole Grain Bread
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Hearty Whole Grain Bread

This hearty whole grain bread is a healthy and delicious alternative to packaged supermarket breads. The seeds and different types of flour add flavor, texture, and fiber, making a filling, satisfying loaf that is great for sandwiches or to go with salads.

The basic recipe consists of water, yeast, whole wheat flour, and salt. You can add more seeds or more types of flour, or trade one type of seed or flour for another, as long the final dough is not sticky. Vitamin C helps the yeast work better. Together with lecithin and pectin, it also keeps the bread fresh longer and improves the texture.

Hearty Whole Grain Bread
Recipe courtesy of Liesbeth Smit
Cook Time 45 min. - 1 hr.
Serves 3 small, or 2 large loaves (about 30 slices)
Ingredients:

4 cups warm water (110–115 degrees Fahrenheit)
3 packets dry active yeast (1/4 ounce each)
1/2 cup whole grain buckwheat flour
1/2 cup whole grain barley flour
1 cup whole grain rye flour
4–5 cups whole wheat flour
4 grams salt
Canola oil or canola oil spray, as needed

Seeds and Grains

1 cup ground flax seeds (grind them in a coffee grinder, or buy milled flax seeds)
1/2 cup sunflower seeds
1/2 cup pepitas (pumpkin seeds)
3/4 cup whole rolled oats
1/2 cup wheat bran
Bread Enhancers
2 crushed 500 milligrams vitamin C supplements (any store brand)
1 tablespoon lecithin (can be found in a natural foods store)
1 teaspoon pectin (can be found in a natural foods store)
Preparation:

Add 4 cups of warm water to a large bowl. Dissolve the yeast, and let it stand for a few minutes until bubbly. Add the bread enhancers (vitamin C, lecithin, and pectin) and stir. Then add the seeds, oats, and wheat bran and stir.
Add the buckwheat, barley, and rye flours to the water-yeast mixture, a half cup at a time, stirring after each addition. Then, add the whole-wheat flour one cup at a time, stirring, until the dough is dry enough to knead by hand. Make sure to mix in the salt with the last cup of flour, because adding salt will diminish the activity of the yeast.
Place the bread on a cutting board or counter top and start kneading: Fold the dough in half towards you and push away with the heels of your hands. Turn the dough one quarter turn and repeat the process for about 10 minutes, until the dough is smooth, elastic, and not sticky.
For the first rise, put the ball of dough in a bowl coated with oil (canola oil spray is very handy). To prevent drying, also coat the top of the dough with a thin layer of oil. Cover the bowl with a wet dish towel or plastic wrap, and let it rise in a warm environment until doubled in size, about 30  minutes. (Placing the bread in an oven with the light on works well. You can also let the dough rise on top of the oven as it is preheating.)
For a lighter-textured loaf, remove the dough from the bowl, fold the dough in half twice, and place it back in the bowl, covered, to let it rise a second time. After the second rise, deflate the dough by punching it gently. Carefully cut the dough into 2 or 3 equal pieces, and put each piece of dough in an oil-coated loaf pan.
Bake at 300 degrees Fahrenheit for 45 to 60 minutes. When your kitchen smells like fresh baked bread and the bread is done, remove from the oven, turn the bread out of the pans onto a rack, and cool the loaves completely. This bread tastes great when it‘s toasted, and it is delicious served with hummus, guacamole, and chopped walnuts. The loaves also freeze well.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1 slice of bread (1/10 of a small loaf, 1/15 of a large loaf)150 calories6 grams of protein25 grams of carbohydrates6 grams of fiber55 milligrams of sodium5 grams of fat( 1 grams of saturated fat1 grams of monounsaturated fat3 grams of polyunsaturated fat)

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.