Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Caesar Salad
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Caesar Salad

This modified Caesar salad recipe uses canned white beans in place of eggs and some of the oil used in a traditional Caesar salad dressing. The beans contribute protein and fiber to the salad. Draining and rinsing canned beans reduces the sodium content by 40 percent. This recipe uses a few sodium-rich ingredients (e.g., anchovies and Parmesan cheese), and therefore it does not need any added salt.

Caesar Salad
Serves 6
Ingredients:

For salad
6 large hearts of romaine, chopped
For dressing
1 cup white, cannellini, or Great Northern beans, drained and rinsed
½ cup water
2 anchovies
4 Tbsp. fresh lemon juice
1 garlic clove
4 Tbsp. grated Parmesan
½ tsp. black pepper
½ cup extra virgin olive oil
For croutons
2 Tbsp. extra-virgin olive oil
2 garlic cloves, finely minced
½ of an 18-inch whole wheat baguette, cubed
Preparation:

Croutons: Preheat the oven to 375 degrees Fahrenheit. In a medium-sized bowl, combine the olive oil and minced garlic. Add the cubed baguette and toss to coat. Spread the croutons on a baking sheet and bake for 5–8 minutes, or until crisp and golden brown.
Dressing: In the container of a food processor combine the beans, water, anchovy, lemon juice, garlic, Parmesan cheese, and black pepper. Process until smooth. With the motor running, slowly add the olive oil to create a creamy, emulsified dressing.
Chop heart of romaine. In a large mixing bowl combine the chopped lettuce and dressing, tossing well to ensure all of the lettuce is coated with the dressing.
To serve, divide the salad among six salad plates, and garnish each plate with croutons.

Nutrition information per serving (1/6 of recipe):

375 calories, 11 g protein, 41 g carbohydrate, 11 g fiber, 3 g sugar (0 g added sugar), 447 mg sodium, 21 mg potassium, 18 g fat (3 g sat, 13 g mono, 2 g poly, 0 g trans), 1 mg cholesterol

Recipe courtesy of Joyce Goldstein

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.