Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Chicken, Shrimp, and Fruit Salad
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Chicken, Shrimp, and Fruit Salad
Chicken, Shrimp, and Fruit Salad
Recipe courtesy of Madhur Jaffrey
Serves 6 (as a first course) or 4 (as a main course)
Ingredients:

¼ teaspoon salt
1 cup peeled and diced Granny Smith apple
1 cup seedless red grapes, cut in half
1 cup seedless green grapes, cut in half
1 orange, segmented, with each segment cut in half
1 tablespoon garlic, fried
½ cup shallots, fried
1 boneless, skinless chicken breast
16 medium shrimp
4 tablespoons roasted, unsalted peanuts, chopped
1 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon sugar
2 tablespoons lime juice or lemon juice
2 to 3 serrano chilies
2 tablespoons cilantro leaves
Preparation:

Cut the chicken into long thin strips and put these into a clean medium-sized frying pan. Add water to cover and ¼ teaspoon salt, then bring to a simmer. Simmer gently for about 5 minutes or until the chicken is just done. Remove the chicken from the water and tear it into shreds 1-inch long or cut it into a ¼-inch dice. Save the water in which it was cooked.
Peel and devein the shrimp. Bring the chicken poaching water to a simmer and add the shrimp. Turn the heat to medium-low. Stir and poach the shrimp for 2 to 3 minutes or until they are just cooked through. Drain. Cut the shrimp into a ¼-inch dice. Combine the chicken, shrimp, and peanuts. Cover and set aside.
Combine 1 teaspoon salt, the sugar, and the lime juice in a small bowl and mix. Set aside. Cut the chilies into very fine rounds. Wash and dry the coriander. Cover and set aside.
Combine the apples, grapes, oranges, chicken, and shrimp in a large bowl. Add the lime juice and sugar mixture. Season with salt and pepper. Add in half of the fried shallots and garlic. Toss. Place in a serving bowl and garnish with the reserved shallots, garlic, cilantro leaves, and chilies.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/4 of recipe250 calories25 grams of protein25 grams of carbohydrates3 grams of fiber670 milligrams of sodium6 grams of fat( 1 grams of saturated fat3 grams of monounsaturated fat2 grams of polyunsaturated fat) 80 milligrams of cholesterol
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.