Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > About
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
About

The Nutrition Source is a leading authority on food and nutrition knowledge, providing science-based guidance for healthy living. Based at the Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health’s Department of Nutrition, The Nutrition Source offers comprehensive nutrition information through timely articles and FAQs, while recipes and tools, including the Healthy Eating Plate, facilitate the translation of food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice. With the media culture full of confusing nutrition misinformation, clinicians, health professionals, journalists, and the general public can rely on and trust The Nutrition Source’s independent, clear, and unbiased content—free from industry influence or support.

Launched in 2001, The Nutrition Source accepts no advertising or commercial sponsorship, nor does it endorse any particular products. Expert faculty from the Department of Nutrition and other invited experts review all content before it is posted on the site, and all content is re-reviewed regularly. This website is meant for educational purposes. The contents of this website are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

Editorial Director:

Lilian Cheung, Lecturer, Director of Health Promotion and Communication in the Department of Nutrition

The Nutrition Source Team:

Brett Otis
Nancy Oliveira

Former contributors and/or website staff:

Sari Kalin
Emily Phares
Will Koh
Pat Skerrett
Hank Dart

Editorial Committee:

Alberto Ascherio, Professor of Nutrition and Epidemiology
Wafaie Fawzi, Richard Saltonstall Professor of Population Sciences; Professor of Nutrition, Epidemiology, and Global Health
Teresa Fung, Adjunct Professor of Nutrition
Gokhan Hotamisligil, J.S. Simmons Professor of Genetics and Metabolism
Frank Hu, Fredrick J. Stare Professor of Nutrition and Epidemiology; Chair, Department of Nutrition
David Hunter, Vincent L. Gregory Professor in Cancer Prevention, Emeritus
Eric Rimm, Professor in the Departments of Epidemiology and Nutrition
Frank Sacks, Professor of Cardiovascular Disease Prevention, Emeritus
Stephanie Smith-Warner, Senior Lecturer on Nutritional Epidemiology
Meir Stampfer, Professor of Epidemiology and Nutrition
Walter Willett,  Professor of Epidemiology and Nutrition
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.