Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Strategies to reduce red meat and elevate your plate
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Strategies to reduce red meat and elevate your plate

You’ve probably heard that eating too much red and processed meat is associated with a range of adverse health effects, including increased risk of heart disease, stroke, type 2 diabetes, some cancers, and even a higher risk of dying early. You may have also heard that producing dairy and red meat (particularly beef, lamb, and goat) stand out for their disproportionate impact on our planet’s health as well.

It’s clear that reducing red meat in our diets can improve our own health and the health of the planet. However, if you’ve grown up (or have grown accustomed to) having beef, pork, and other red meats on your plate at most meals—such a change may seem daunting. But you don’t have to completely cut it out to make a difference; even a partial shift away from a meat-centered diet can be a step in the right direction.

If you’re not quite sure where to start, here are four key approaches to cutting back the red meat while keeping your meals filling and flavorful. Simply find your “starting point” and move forward with the strategies that work for you.

Eat a little less red meat, any way you can
Assess how often you eat red meat, and see if one of these strategies can help you find a way to cut back a bit.
Swap out red meat for healthier meats
If you’re thinking of a meal that features red meat, see if you can replace it with a better option, like poultry or seafood.
Consume less meat, enjoy more variety
This approach boosts healthy plant-based foods like beans, nuts, whole grains, and other veggies, while still providing ways to incorporate some of your favorite animal-based foods.
Prioritize hearty and savory plant-based preparations
Simple strategies for creating filling, delicious, and even budget-friendly plant-based dishes.
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.