Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Endive Salad with Citrus Walnut Dressing
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Endive Salad with Citrus Walnut Dressing

When used properly, walnuts can provide creaminess, richness, and superior emulsification to sauces. Here we use them in a bright, citrusy dressing with a little kick. Blending walnuts in a base of ginger, garlic, and jalapeno gives plenty of heat. And instead of mustard or mayonnaise, the walnuts help to keep the sauce smooth and homogenous as we add the oil. The result is an ultra-smooth, creamy dressing that’s perfect on salads. For this dish, we like the classic combination of endive and citrus: The sweetness of oranges balances the bitter sweetness of endive, while the bright acidity of the dressing ties the flavors together. This is the perfect fancy side dish for your next dinner party, or could serve as a refreshing light lunch.

Endive Salad with Citrus Walnut Dressing
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves 4
Ingredients:

Dressing
½ cup lime juice (about 4 limes)
1 cup (4 ounces) toasted walnuts
1 1-inch piece ginger
1 clove garlic
1 jalapeno, stemmed, seeded, and cut into 1-inch pieces
Salt
1 cup cilantro leaves
½ cup parsley leaves

¼ cup extra-virgin olive oil

Salad

5 belgian endive (about 4 ounces each), wilted or bruised leaves discarded
3 cara cara or blood oranges
Flake sea salt
Preparation:

For the Dressing: Place lime juice, ¼ cup (1 ounce) walnuts, ginger, garlic, jalapeno, and 1 teaspoon salt in blender and blend on high speed until smooth and frothy, about 30 seconds. Add cilantro and blend until just combined, 15 to 30 seconds longer. With blender running, drizzle in oil until smooth and creamy, about 30 seconds. Strain dressing through fine-mesh strainer, pressing on solids to extract as much liquid as possible. Transfer dressing to bowl and season with salt to taste.
For the Salad: Cut away peel and pith from oranges. Holding fruit over bowl, use paring knife to slice between membranes to release segments; set aside. Roughly chop remaining 3/4 cup walnuts. Spoon dressing on large plate or serving bowl. Shingle endive pieces on top of sauce and scatter orange segments over endive. Sprinkle with chopped walnuts, drizzle extra dressing and olive oil, and season to taste with flake sea salt. Serve.
Nutrition facts:
1 serving478 calories12 grams of protein29 grams of carbohydrates8 grams of fiber12 grams of sugar219 milligrams of sodium506 milligrams of potassium40 grams of fat( 4 grams of saturated fat10 grams of monounsaturated fat2 grams of polyunsaturated fat)

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.