Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Green Lentil Hummus with Herbs and Olives
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Green Lentil Hummus with Herbs and Olives

When it comes to hummus, most people think chickpeas. But truth be told, you can make hummus using any number of legumes. Lentils are a perfect example: grassy and earthier than chickpeas, they lend themselves nicely to this Levantine dip. Typically, chickpeas and other beans require long cooking times and even pre-soaking in baking soda to achieve a soft enough texture for hummus. But lentils cook to the perfect consistency in a flash, no kitchen hacks required, resulting in a super smooth hummus. We keep the flavors in our version classic: plenty of tahini, lemon, fresh garlic, and a dash of cumin. To dress up the dish, we pair our hummus with a simple, bright herb salad and plenty of assorted seeds. Tuck into this hummus with some pita or lavash—the perfect light dinner or party-pleasing appetizer.

Green Lentil Hummus with Herbs and Olives
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves 16 quarter-cup servings (recipe makes about 4 cups)
Ingredients:

1 ¼ cups (8 ¾ ounces) green lentils, picked over and rinsed
1 teaspoon plus 2 teaspoons kosher salt, divided
8 cups water
 
½ cup plus 2 teaspoons lemon juice (4 lemons), divided
4 cloves garlic
⅔ cup tahini
¼ teaspoon cumin
 
¾ cup fresh parsley, chopped coarse
½ cup fresh dill sprigs, chopped coarse
½ cup kalamata olives, pitted and sliced thin
2 tablespoons plus 2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, divided
2 teaspoons lemon juice
Kosher salt
2 tablespoons pepitas, toasted
2 tablespoons unsalted sunflower seeds, toasted
Preparation:

Bring lentils, 1 teaspoon salt, and water to boil in large saucepan over high heat, skimming off any foam that rises to surface. Reduce heat to medium-low and simmer until lentils are very tender, 25 to 30 minutes. Drain lentils and set aside.
Meanwhile, pulse ½ cup lemon juice, garlic, and 2 teaspoons salt in food processor until coarse puree forms, about 20 pulses. Let steep for at least 10 minutes or up to 30 minutes. Add tahini to processor with lemon juice mixture and process until smooth and well combined, 45 to 60 seconds. Scrape down sides of bowl and add cumin and lentils. Process until mixture is very smooth, about 4 minutes. Season with salt to taste and adjust consistency with up to 2 tablespoons additional water.
Toss parsley, dill, olives, 2 tablespoons oil, and 2 teaspoons lemon juice together in small bowl. Season with salt to taste. Transfer hummus to large bowl and use back of large spoon to spread hummus, leaving well at center. Place herb salad in center of well. Sprinkle pepitas and sunflower seeds over top and drizzle with remaining 2 tablespoons oil. Serve with whole-wheat pita bread or whole-grain crackers. Leftover hummus can be refrigerated in airtight container for up to 1 week.
Nutrition facts:
¼ cup169 calories7 grams of protein13 grams of carbohydrates6 grams of fiber1 grams of sugar267 milligrams of sodium211 milligrams of potassium10 grams of fat( 2 grams of saturated fat3 grams of monounsaturated fat1 grams of polyunsaturated fat)

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.