Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Shrimp with Red Curry and Crispy Sprouted Lentils
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Shrimp with Red Curry and Crispy Sprouted Lentils

While sprouted lentils are certainly enjoyable eaten raw (see the recipe to make them at home), they transform into something equally delicious when cooked. Crisping them in a pan creates crunchy, toasty morsels that are something between popcorn, toasted nuts, and potato chips. Here we pair these crispy lentils with a simple but intense dish of poached shrimp in red curry. A splash of coconut milk rounds out the dish and gives body, and we serve the shrimp with plenty of fresh cilantro. Serve this dish with brown rice and plenty of limes for a light but satisfying dinner.  

Shrimp with Red Curry and Crispy Sprouted Lentils
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves 4
Ingredients:

3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
1 cup sprouted lentils
⅛ teaspoon salt, plus more to taste
½ cup coconut milk
1 tablespoon cornstarch
4 cloves garlic, grated
1 2-inch piece ginger, grated
¼ cup (2 ounces) red curry paste
⅓ cup vegetable broth
1 ½ pounds fresh, shell-on jumbo shrimp (16 to 20 per pound), peeled, deveined, and tails removed
12 fresh cilantro sprigs, trimmed and cut into 2-inch pieces
Preparation:

Heat 2 tablespoons oil in large saucepan over medium-high heat until shimmering. Add lentils and cook, stirring occasionally, until lightly browned, about 3 minutes. Drain lentils on paper towel-lined plate. Season lentils with salt to taste and set aside. 
Whisk coconut milk and cornstarch in small bowl until smooth and combined and set aside. Heat remaining 1 tablespoon oil in now-empty pot over medium heat until shimmering. Add garlic, ginger, and curry paste, and 1/8 teaspoon salt and cook, stirring occasionally, until mixture is dry and sticks to bottom of pot, 4 to 5 minutes. Add broth and cook, stirring and scraping bottom of pot with wooden spoon, until mixture is combined and bubbling, about 30 seconds. Whisk in coconut milk mixture and cook, stirring occasionally, until mixture is thickened, combined, and bubbling, 1 to 2 minutes longer. Season sauce with salt to taste.
Reduce heat to low, add shrimp, cover, and cook, flipping shrimp halfway through cooking, until shrimp are just opaque, 4 to 6 minutes. Transfer shrimp to serving platter and pour sauce over shrimp. Sprinkle lentils and cilantro over shrimp, and serve.
Nutrition facts:
1 serving340 calories39 grams of protein15 grams of carbohydrates2 grams of fiber2 grams of sugar754 milligrams of sodium191 milligrams of potassium16 grams of fat( 5 grams of saturated fat8 grams of monounsaturated fat1 grams of polyunsaturated fat) 250 milligrams of cholesterol
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.