Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Hummus
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Hummus

Hummus is a classic bean spread, popular as a mezze (appetizer) in Syria, Lebanon, Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and Israel. Classic hummus doesn’t contain the ingredients such as roasted peppers, spinach, artichokes, or sun-dried tomatoes seen in many supermarket brands, but if you want to add any of these to your hummus, have fun being creative! You can serve hummus with pita bread or with cucumbers, radishes, carrots, and bell peppers.

Hummus
Recipe courtesy of Chef Joyce Goldstein
Serves 8
Ingredients:

1 ¾ cup (one 15-ounce can) chickpeas, drained and rinsed
1 cup sesame tahini (also called sesame butter)
½ cup fresh lemon juice
2 garlic cloves, finely minced
1 to 2 tablespoons cold water
½ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon black pepper, freshly ground
¼ teaspoon cayenne red pepper (optional)
½ teaspoon cumin, ground (optional)

Optional garnishes:

2 tablespoons olive oil
3 tablespoons flat leaf parsley, chopped
3 tablespoons pomegranate seeds
½ teaspoon cumin, ground
½ teaspoon cayenne pepper or Aleppo pepper
Preparation:

In a food processor combine the tahini, lemon juice, garlic, water, salt, pepper, and optional spices, if desired. Pulse to combine.
Add the chickpeas and process until smooth. You may need to add more water if the consistency is too thick. Add enough cold water to achieve a spreadable consistency.
When you’re ready to serve, spoon the hummus onto a shallow plate. Note that if you make hummus ahead of time, the mixture will thicken as it stands, in which case you may need to thin it with water. Smooth the hummus with a spoon or spatula. If desired, sprinkle with olive oil, parsley, or other optional garnishes listed.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/8 of recipe245 calories8 grams of protein20 grams of carbohydrates4 grams of fiber265 milligrams of sodium15 grams of fat( 2 grams of saturated fat6 grams of monounsaturated fat7 grams of polyunsaturated fat)
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.