Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Potassium
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Potassium

Potassium is an essential mineral that is needed by all tissues in the body. It is sometimes referred to as an electrolyte because it carries a small electrical charge that activates various cell and nerve functions. Potassium is found naturally in many foods and as a supplement. Its main role in the body is to help maintain normal levels of fluid inside our cells. Sodium, its counterpart, maintains normal fluid levels outside of cells. Potassium also helps muscles to contract and supports normal blood pressure.

Recommended Amounts

The U.S. Dietary Reference Intakes state that there is not enough evidence to establish a Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for potassium. However, the National Academy of Medicine has established an Adequate Intake (AI) for potassium. [1]

For women 14-18 years of age, the AI is 2,300 mg daily; for women 19+, 2,600 mg. For pregnant and lactating women, the AI ranges from 2,500-2,900 depending on age.
For men 14-18 years of age, the AI is 3,000 mg; for men 19+, 3,400 mg.

It is estimated that the average daily intake of potassium in adults is about 2,320 mg for women and 3,016 mg for men. [2]

Potassium and Health

The functions of sodium and potassium in the body are closely related and often studied together.

The interplay of potassium and sodium
Potassium and sodium are closely interconnected but have opposite effects in the body. Both are essential nutrients that play key roles in maintaining physiological balance, and both have been linked to the risk of chronic diseases, especially cardiovascular disease. High salt intake increases blood pressure, which can lead to heart disease, while high potassium intake can help relax blood vessels and excrete sodium while decreasing blood pressure. Our bodies need far more potassium than sodium each day, but the typical U.S. diet is just the opposite: Americans average about 3,300 milligrams of sodium per day, about 75% of which comes from processed foods, while only getting about 2,900 milligrams of potassium each day. [3,4]

A study in the Archives of Internal Medicine found that:

People who ate high-sodium, low-potassium diets had a higher risk of dying from a heart attack or any cause. In this study, people with the highest sodium intakes had a 20% higher risk of death from any cause than people with the lowest sodium intakes. People with the highest potassium intakes had a 20% lower risk of dying than people with the lowest intakes. But what may be even more important for health is the relationship of sodium to potassium in the diet. People with the highest ratio of sodium to potassium in their diets had double the risk of dying of a heart attack than people with the lowest ratio, and they had a 50% higher risk of death from any cause. [5]
People can make a key dietary change to help lower their risk: Eat more fresh vegetables and fruits, which are naturally high in potassium and low in sodium, but eat less bread, cheese, processed meat, and other processed foods that are high in sodium and low in potassium.
Cardiovascular disease
Hypertension
Bone health
Kidney stones
Is there any research behind Acid-Alkaline Diet claims?
You may have heard of an acid-alkaline diet promoted for weight loss or cancer prevention. It became popular when authors claimed that eating certain “alkaline” foods could counterbalance the effects of a high “acidic” diet that might otherwise lead to various chronic diseases. Most health experts rejected these claims because it is nearly impossible to dramatically change the pH of blood in healthy people through diet alone. The body tightly regulates the pH level in blood to about 7.4, because swinging to either extreme of too acid or alkaline can be life-threatening.

However, there is some truth that the metabolism of certain foods can create bicarbonates, which neutralizes acids in the body. [1] Potassium-rich foods that have an alkalizing effect include fruits, vegetables, almonds, and lentils. One theory suggests that a long-term high intake of protein foods such as meats, poultry, fish, dairy, and eggs, as well as cereal grains may create a condition called low-grade metabolic acidosis due to their high sulfate and phosphate content. [10,16] This occurs particularly if the diet does not contain enough counterbalancing potassium-rich foods. The condition is sometimes referred to as the ‘‘acid-ash hypothesis,’’ which may cause a very slight drop in blood pH, though still falling within a normal range. Theories suggest that even a small change such as this may increase one’s risk of developing conditions like kidney stones and bone loss.

BOTTOM LINE: Although theories in this area are compelling, the evidence is still inconsistent and it has not been shown in controlled trials that diet can significantly change blood pH in healthy people. Therefore it is too early to make specific recommendations based on this theory.

Food Sources

Potassium is widely available in many foods, especially fruits and vegetables. Leafy greens, beans, nuts, dairy foods, and starchy vegetables like winter squash are rich sources.

Dried fruits (raisins, apricots)
Beans, lentils
Potatoes
Winter squash (acorn, butternut)
Spinach, broccoli
Beet greens
Avocado
Bananas
Cantaloupe
Oranges, orange juice
Coconut water
Tomatoes
Dairy and plant milks (soy, almond)
Yogurt
Cashews, almonds
Chicken
Salmon
Signs of Deficiency and Toxicity
Deficiency

The kidneys work to maintain normal blood levels of potassium by flushing out excess amounts through urine. Potassium can also be lost through stool and sweat. At least 400-800 mg daily from food is needed because of normal daily losses. Any conditions that increase fluid losses beyond normal such as vomiting, diarrhea, and certain medications like diuretics can lead to a deficiency, called hypokalemia. Hypokalemia is most common in hospitalized patients who are taking medications that cause the body to excrete too much potassium. It is also seen in people with inflammatory bowel diseases (Crohn’s disease, ulcerative colitis) that may cause diarrhea and malabsorption of nutrients.

It is rare for a potassium deficiency to be caused by too low a food intake alone because it is found in so many foods; however an inadequate intake combined with heavy sweating, diuretic use, laxative abuse, or severe nausea and vomiting can quickly lead to hypokalemia. Another reason is a deficiency of magnesium, as the kidneys need magnesium to help reabsorb potassium and maintain normal levels in cells.

Fatigue
Muscle cramps or weakness
Constipation
Muscle paralysis and irregular heart rate (with severe hypokalemia)
Toxicity

Too much potassium in the blood is called hyperkalemia. In healthy people the kidneys will efficiently remove extra potassium, mainly through the urine. However, certain situations can lead to hyperkalemia: advanced kidney disease, taking medications that hold onto potassium in the body (including NSAIDs), or people who have compromised kidneys who eat a high-potassium diet (more than 4,700 mg daily) or use potassium-based salt substitutes. Symptoms of hyperkalemia:

Weakness, fatigue
Nausea, vomiting
Shortness of breath
Chest pain
Heart palpitations, irregular heart rate
Did You Know?
The chemical symbol for potassium is “K,” not to be confused with vitamin K.
Salt substitutes are sometimes made from potassium chloride, which replaces some or all of the sodium chloride in table salt. Although those on salt-restricted diets may benefit from its much lower sodium content, potassium salt has a bitter aftertaste when heated so it is not recommended for cooking. Check with your doctor before trying a potassium salt, because extra potassium can be dangerous for people who have trouble eliminating excess amounts or who are taking medications that can increase potassium levels in the bloodstream.
Related

Vitamins and Minerals

References

Last reviewed March 2023

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.