Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Healthy Weight > Diet Reviews
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Diet Reviews

From bookstores to social media to blogs, there’s no shortage of information on diet. So how to differentiate what “works” from an overhyped fad?

It’s important to remember that even if a particular diet may be successful for one person, it may not be effective for another due to individual differences in genes and lifestyle. And while research shows that calories matter, focusing on food quality is an equally important part of preventing weight gain and promoting weight loss. Diets are also more likely to be successful when they are easier to follow, so tailoring a strategy to suit your own lifestyle is key.

Still, when faced with the seemingly endless promotion of weight-loss strategies and diet plans, it helps to see what evidence is supporting them. In this series, we take a look at some popular diets and approaches to eating—and review the research behind them.

Anti-Inflammatory Diet
An anti-inflammatory diet is promoted as a remedy to battle inflammation in the body. A common belief is that “inflammation” is always bad. Although it produces unpleasant side effects, inflammation is actually a healthy response by our immune system. Learn more about anti-inflammatory diets: how they work, potential pitfalls, and what the research says.
Clean Eating
Once just a buzzword, “clean eating” is now a popular eating style. What it means will depend on who you ask. The terms clean eating and clean diets are not federally regulated in the U.S., so interpretation by consumers and the marketing of “clean” products by the food industry can vary widely. Learn more about the potential pros and cons of this approach to eating.
DASH Diet
The DASH (Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension) diet is sometimes prescribed by doctors to help treat high blood pressure, however numerous studies show wide-ranging health benefits of this eating pattern. Learn more about DASH: how it works, potential pitfalls, and what the research says.
Gluten-Free for Weight Loss
A gluten-free diet eliminates all foods containing or contaminated with gluten. As the sole treatment for the 1-2% of Americans who have celiac disease, this diet is not new. What is new—and driving these sales upward—is the use of a gluten-free diet for weight loss. Learn more about a gluten-free diet: how it works, potential pitfalls, and what the research says about this strategy for weight loss. 
Intermittent Fasting for Weight Loss
Intermittent fasting is a diet regimen that cycles between brief periods of fasting, with either no food or significant calorie reduction, and periods of unrestricted eating. The most common methods are fasting on alternate days, for whole days with a specific frequency per week, or during a set time frame. Learn more about intermittent fasting: how it works, potential pitfalls, and what the research says about this strategy for weight loss. 
Intuitive Eating
ntuitive eating (IE) is not so much a diet plan as an approach to eating based on one’s internal needs, whether physical, emotional, or other influencers. When these needs are recognized, they may determine one’s food choices. Learn more about intuitive eating: how it works, potential pitfalls, and what the available research says.
Ketogenic Diet for Weight Loss
The ketogenic or “keto” diet is a low-carbohydrate, fat-rich eating plan that has been used for centuries to treat specific medical conditions. However in recent years, this diet has gained considerable attention as a potential weight-loss strategy. Learn more about the keto diet: how it works, potential pitfalls, and what the research says about this strategy for weight loss. 
Mediterranean Diet
The Mediterranean diet is a primarily plant-based eating plan that includes daily intake of whole grains, olive oil, fruits, vegetables, beans and other legumes, nuts, herbs, and spices. Other foods like animal proteins are eaten in smaller quantities, with the preferred animal protein being fish and seafood. It does not specify portion sizes or specific amounts, as it is up to the individual to decide exactly how much food to eat at each meal. Learn more about the Mediterranean diet: how it works, potential pitfalls, and what the research says.
MIND Diet
Dementia is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States, driving many people to search for ways to prevent cognitive decline. The Mediterranean-DASH Diet Intervention for Neurodegenerative Delay, or MIND diet, targets the health of the aging brain. Learn more about the MIND diet: how it works, potential pitfalls, and what the research says.
Mindful Eating
This approach to eating focuses on the eating experience, body-related sensations, and thoughts and feelings about food, with heightened awareness and without judgment. Attention is paid to the foods being chosen, internal and external physical cues, and your responses to those cues. Learn more about the mindful eating: how it works, potential pitfalls, and what the available research says.
Paleo Diet for Weight Loss
The Paleolithic or “Paleo” diet seeks to address 21st century ills by revisiting the way humans ate during the Paleolithic era more than 2 million years ago. Paleo proponents state that because our genetics and anatomy have changed very little since the Stone Age, we should eat foods available during that time to promote good health. Learn more about the Paleo diet: how it works, potential pitfalls, and what the research says about this strategy for weight loss. 

Last reviewed December 2022

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.