Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Sprouted Lentils
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Sprouted Lentils

If you’ve ever perused a supermarket’s “fancy” produce section, you may have noticed a growing selection of sprouted grains and beans. These tailed plants adorn many overpriced salads but you don’t have to pay a premium to get your hands on some sprouts. They’re easy to make, and none are easier to make than sprouted lentils. All you need to do is soak some dried lentils, drain them, rinse them, and let them sit. Over time, this repeated rinsing and draining jump-starts the germination process, and sprouts begin to form. Typically, lentils need to be cooked first to be easily digested. But sprouting neutralizes phytic acid and facilitates the bioavailability of nutrients like B vitamins and vitamin C. And on top of being good for you, sprouting opens new avenues for flavor: Sprouted lentils are grassy, crunchy, refreshing, and filling. Use them on slaws or salads, or crisp them up for a flavorful garnish. You can use most varieties of lentils, but green, black, and de Puy lentils work best. For best results, we don’t recommend using red lentils, yellow lentils, white lentils, or any varieties with their skins removed.

Sprouted Lentils
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves Makes about 4 cups
Ingredients:

1 cup green, black, or de Puy lentils, rinsed and picked over
Water
Preparation:

Place lentils in 1-quart container and fill with water. Cover loosely with perforated lid or coffee filter fastened with rubber band and let soak at least 8 hours or up to 16 hours.
Drain lentils in fine-mesh strainer; return lentils to container and re-cover with lid. After 8 hours, transfer lentils to fine-mesh strainer and rinse under cold water; return lentils to container and re-cover with lid. Repeat step 2, rinsing and letting lentils sit, twice per day, until sprouts begin to form, 3 to 4 days.
When sprouts have grown to desired length, spread lentils on sheet tray lined with paper towels to dry. Return sprouted lentils to container and store in refrigerator until ready to use. Sprouted lentils will keep up to 7 days in refrigerator.
Nutrition facts:
1/2 cup85 calories6 grams of protein14 grams of carbohydrates7 grams of fiber2 milligrams of sodium229 milligrams of potassium
Recipes featuring sprouted lentils
Sprouted Lentil, Cabbage, and Celery Slaw
An easy, crunch-filled salad that highlights the crisp texture and grassy flavor of sprouted lentils.
GET THE RECIPE.
Shrimp with Red Curry and Crispy Sprouted Lentils
Crisping sprouted lentils in a pan creates crunchy morsels that are something between popcorn, toasted nuts. Here they are paired with a simple but intense dish of poached shrimp in red curry.
GET THE RECIPE.
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.