Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Grilled Watermelon Salad with Roasted Figs
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Grilled Watermelon Salad with Roasted Figs

Grilling and roasting fruit develops caramel flavors. Adding a small amount of intensely flavored, hard cheese like ricotta salata and a bit of sea salt, like fleur de sel, heightens these caramel flavors, making a fresh fruit salad seem like a decadent dessert.

Grilled Watermelon Salad with Roasted Figs
Recipe courtesy of The Culinary Institute of America
Serves 6
Ingredients:

2 pounds watermelon, peeled
¼ cup extra virgin olive oil
1 lime, zested and then juiced
9 fresh figs
2 ounces ricotta salata cheese
2 ounces micro greens or baby greens
2 tablespoons fig or maple syrup
½ teaspoon fleur de sel
Preparation:

Preheat your grill to medium high and preheat your oven to 375 degrees Fahrenheit.
Cut the watermelon into small triangles about 4 inches by 3 inches and about a ½-inch thick; you should have 12 pieces.  Brush with olive oil and chill. Chill six medium-sized salad or dessert plates for serving the salad.
Zest and juice the lime and set aside 1 tablespoon of juice for dressing the greens.
Cut the figs in half and place cut side up on a sheet pan. Brush with olive oil.  Roast for 15 minutes, or until they are soft.
Grate the ricotta salata on a microplane or small grater and set aside in the refrigerator.
Place the chilled plates out on the counter and drizzle with a little of the fig or maple syrup. Grill the watermelon triangles by marking each side for about 45 seconds, repeat until you have cross-hatch marks on either side. Place two pieces of watermelon over the fig or maple syrup and arrange decoratively. Drizzle each plate with lime juice and sprinkle with a little zest.
Place the microgreens or baby greens in a small bowl and add the lime juice.  Add the remaining 2 tablespoons olive oil and toss to coat. Place a small mound on each of the six plated watermelons; sprinkle with ricotta salata.
Place three fig halves around the salad and garnish with fleur de sel; serve immediately.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/6 of recipe230 calories8 grams of protein28 grams of carbohydrates3 grams of fiber345 milligrams of sodium350 milligrams of potassium11 grams of fat( 3 grams of saturated fat7 grams of monounsaturated fat1 grams of polyunsaturated fat) 8 milligrams of cholesterol

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.