Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Healthy Weight > Diet Reviews > Diet Review: Gluten-Free for Weight Loss
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Diet Review: Gluten-Free for Weight Loss

Finding yourself confused by the seemingly endless promotion of weight-loss strategies and diet plans? In this series, we take a look at some popular diets—and review the research behind them.

What Is It?

A gluten-free diet is not new. It is the sole treatment for 1-2% of Americans who have celiac disease, a serious condition where the body attacks a protein called gluten, naturally found in many whole grains, causing a spectrum of symptoms that range from bloating to intestinal damage. Up to 6% of people have a related stomach-upsetting but less threatening condition called non-celiac gluten sensitivity. With such a small number truly needing this diet, why have sales of gluten-free products topped $12 billion according to market research?

What is new—and driving these sales upward—is the use of a gluten-free diet for weight loss, partly fueled by celebrity endorsements and personal testimonies of not only pounds quickly shed, but increased energy, improved digestion, and even clearer skin. Consumer surveys reveal that people perceive gluten-free products to be healthier than their gluten-containing counterparts, and almost a third of Americans are now avoiding or reducing their intake of gluten. [1]

How It Works

A gluten-free diet eliminates all foods containing or contaminated with gluten. Gluten is largely ubiquitous in foods, found as a main ingredient (in wheat, rye, barley, triticale, cross-contaminated oats), in sauces (soy sauce, malt vinegar, flour), and as additives or fillers (maltodextrin, wheat starch). See What Is a Gluten-Free Diet?

When first going gluten-free, perhaps the most noticeable change is having to relinquish favorite staples of bread, pasta, cereals, and processed snack foods. Because some of these products, which are typically highly processed, may be low in nutrients and high in calories, one may feel better and even lose some weight soon after removing them from the diet. Although there are now plenty of gluten-free counterparts to take their place, a gluten-free diet usually causes one to revisit naturally gluten-free whole foods like fruits, vegetables, and grains like brown rice, quinoa, and millet. Including these minimally processed, high-fiber foods may also help to promote weight loss and a feeling of well-being.

The Research So Far

Though research has explored the effects of a gluten-free diet on gastrointestinal disorders, autism, and fibromyalgia, there is none that examines the diet’s effects on weight loss alone or for general health benefits. Because of the lack of experimental studies on weight loss, some researchers have instead examined the long-term effects of people with celiac disease on gluten-free diets, or who are generally healthy and consume a diet low in wheat and other gluten-containing grains. They have found that gluten-free diets: 1) may promote certain nutrient deficiencies, 2) may increase the risk of some chronic diseases, and 3) may actually cause weight gain.

Intakes of people with celiac disease on a strict gluten-free diet were found to have inadequate intakes of fiber, iron, and calcium. [2] Other research has found gluten-free cereal products to be low not only in those nutrients but also B vitamins including thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, and folate.
A study of over 100,000 participants without celiac disease found that those who restricted gluten intake were likely to limit their intake of whole grains and experienced an increased risk of heart disease compared with those who had higher gluten intake. [3] Many studies have found that people with higher intakes of whole grains including whole wheat (2-3 servings daily) compared with groups eating low amounts (less than 2 servings daily) had significantly lower risk of heart disease and stroke, type 2 diabetes, and deaths from all causes. [4-7]
Gluten may act as a prebiotic, feeding the “good” bacteria in our bodies. [8-10] It contains a prebiotic carbohydrate called arabinoxylan oligosaccharide that has been shown to stimulate the activity of bifidobacteria in the colon, bacteria normally found in a healthy human gut. A change in the amount or activity of these bacteria has been associated with gastrointestinal diseases including inflammatory bowel disease, colorectal cancer, and irritable bowel syndrome.
Research is conflicting, but some studies have shown weight gain or increased BMI in people with celiac disease after starting a gluten-free diet. [10-13] This may be partly due to improved absorption of nutrients, a reduction in stomach discomfort, and increased appetite after starting the diet. However, another suspected reason is an increased intake of gluten-free processed food options containing high amounts of calories, fat and sugar.
Potential Pitfalls

Gluten-free foods wear a health halo, a belief that a food product is healthful even when it may not offer special health benefits for most people. Research has shown that if one aspect of a food is advertised as healthy or people believe it to be healthy (in this case, the term “gluten-free”), there is a tendency to eat more of it. [14] This may promote weight gain. Also, an overreliance on processed gluten-free products may lead to a decreased intake of certain nutrients like fiber and B vitamins that are protective against chronic diseases.

Bottom Line

Although a gluten-free diet is the primary treatment for celiac disease and may help to alleviate symptoms in various conditions related to gluten sensitivity, there is currently no evidence showing that a gluten-free diet is effective for weight loss or for general health benefits.  For individuals who don’t have celiac disease or gluten sensitivity, there is no need to restrict gluten consumption. A healthy dietary pattern typically includes higher amounts of whole grains and lower amounts of refined grains and added sugar.

Related
Gluten: A Benefit of Harm to the Body?
Healthy Weight
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Other Diet Reviews
References

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.