Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Blueberry Muffins
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Blueberry Muffins

If you buy a blueberry muffin at a coffee shop, you’ll likely be buying a muffin that weighs 5 ounces, contains 450 calories, and is made with refined flour and lots of added sugar (see for yourself). The muffins from this recipe weigh about 2 ounces, contain 120 calories, and are made with a mixture of whole wheat, white, and almond flour. (You don’t need to buy almond flour; you can make your own almond flour by grinding whole almonds in your food processor.) All of the butter was replaced with canola oil. And the amount of fresh blueberries was doubled. Orange zest adds a zingy background note that contrasts nicely with the sweetness of the blueberries. The result is a moist, flavorful blueberry muffin that will provide longer lasting energy compared to the usual coffee shop muffin.

Blueberry Muffins
Serves 18 muffins or 30 mini muffins
Ingredients:

1 cup (120 g) whole wheat pastry flour
¾ cup (90 g) white whole wheat flour
¼ cup (26 g) almond flour
1 tsp. (4 g) baking powder
½ tsp. (4 g) baking soda
½ tsp. (2 g) salt
1 tsp. (2 g) orange zest
1 ½ cups (200 g) fresh blueberries
2 eggs
1¼ cups (286 g) low fat (1%) buttermilk
4 Tbsp. (42 g) brown sugar
6 Tbsp. (78 g) canola oil
1 Tbsp. (14 g) orange juice, freshly squeezed
½ tsp. (4 g) vanilla
Preparation:

Place the rack in the top third of the oven and preheat the oven to 400 degrees Fahrenheit Line muffin tins with paper liners.
In a large mixing bowl, combine the flours, baking powder, baking soda, salt, and orange zest. Add the fresh blue berries and toss gently to coat the blueberries in flour. This will help keep the blueberries suspended in the batter versus falling to the bottom.
In a medium mixing bowl, lightly beat the eggs, then whisk in the buttermilk, brown sugar, canola oil, orange juice, and vanilla. Don’t be concerned if the mixture looks curdled or lumpy.
Pour the wet ingredients into the dry ingredients and stir until most of the flour is incorporated. The mixture can be slightly lumpy; don’t over mix. Divide the batter among the 18 prepared muffin cups.
Bake 12 to 14 minutes, until the muffins are golden brown around the edges.

Nutrition information per serving (1 muffin, or 1/18 of recipe):

120 calories, 3 g protein, 14 g carbohydrate, 2 g fiber, 5 g sugar (2 g added sugar), 125 mg sodium, 20 mg potassium, 5 g fat (0.5 g sat, 3 g mono, 1.5 g poly, 0 g trans), 20 mg cholesterol

Recipe courtesy of The Culinary Institute of America

Related
The Great Muffin Makeover
Blueberry Muffin Battle
Harvard Chan Cooks: recipe videos

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.