Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Food Features > Vinegar
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Vinegar

Not many foods play the role of both a prized cooking ingredient and household cleaner. The word vinegar derives from the French “vin aigre,” or sour wine. It has been traced back to 5000 B.C.E. in Babylon, not just for cooking but as a medicine, a preservative, and a drink to boost strength and promote wellness. Legend describes vinegar’s discovery when a forgotten wine was left in storage for several months, causing it to ferment and turn sour.

Vinegar is a combination of acetic acid and water made by a two-step fermentation process. First, yeast feed on the sugar or starch of any liquid from a plant food such as fruits, whole grains, potatoes, or rice. This liquid ferments into alcohol. The alcohol is then exposed to oxygen and the acetic acid bacteria Acetobacter to ferment again over weeks or months, forming vinegar. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration requires vinegar to contain at least 4% acetic acid, but may range up to 8% in commonly used vinegars. Although acetic acid is responsible for the tart and pungent flavors and odors we recognize, vinegar also contains trace vitamins, mineral salts, amino acids, and polyphenolic compounds [1]. Flavors range from sour to savory to sweet. Some vinegars, such as balsamic, can be left to ferment up to 25 years.

Vinegars and Health

Early records from China, the Middle East, and Greece describe vinegar for medicinal purposes: as a digestive aid, an antibacterial balm to dress wounds, and treatment for cough. Today, vinegar is often touted as an all-purpose treatment for everything from minor ailments to chronic diseases. To be clear, existing scientific research does not support the use of vinegar as an effective treatment for any of these conditions. However, some animal studies and small human studies have suggested a health benefit from vinegar, which has fueled its popularity in mainstream media.

Below we take a look at some of the most popular health claims associated with vinegar, and review the limited research behind them.
Nutrients

Vinegar is low in calories and nutrients. Depending on the type, one tablespoon of vinegar contains anywhere from 2 to 15 calories. The lowest calorie versions like distilled vinegar have no nutrient value; others contain trace amounts of nutrients. Because most vinegars are free of sodium and sugar, they are an ideal ingredient to flavor foods on restricted diets. However, not all are calorie-free. Some vinegars are a blend of grape juice and wine vinegar, sometimes with added sugar, so it is important to read the nutrition facts label and ingredients list to know exactly what you are getting.

How To Use
The acidity or sourness of vinegar brightens the flavor of food and adds balance to a rich dish. It is found in popular kitchen staples like salad dressings, marinades, sauces, mayonnaise, and ketchup.
Vinegar can change the texture of foods. It breaks down the chemical structure of protein, such as when used as a marinade to tenderize meats and fish. Vinegar can also be used to make cottage cheese by adding it to milk. The acid in vinegar separates the milk’s solid curds from the liquid whey.
Quick-Pickled Beets and Fennel

Vinegar may be used to pickle food, a preservation method that extends the shelf life of perishable foods by killing bacteria. Pickling involves soaking a food in a brine solution made from vinegar, water, salt, and sugar, which also changes the food’s flavor.

There are several types of vinegars available. Specialty vinegars may have added herbs like basil, clove, or cinnamon, or are sweetened with fruit juices. The following are common types and how they are used:
White Distilled: Made by fermentation of a distilled alcohol, which often originates from fermented grains. Note that the role of grains is only indirect in their use to make alcohol, which is then distilled to produce a water solution of nearly pure ethyl alcohol, followed by fermentation into a solution of nearly pure acetic acid (in water). This process accounts for the lack of savory, aromatic flavors found in wine vinegars. The resulting acidity is ideal for pickling because it does not alter the color of fruits and vegetables. It’s also a popular inexpensive choice for cleaning.
Balsamic: Made from fermented grape must (whole pressed grapes). This thick dark brown vinegar may taste a little sweeter and mellow in comparison with other vinegars. It can be used in salad dressings and marinades, or simmered into a thick sauce called a “reduction” to be drizzled onto fruit or ice cream.
Rice: Made from fermented rice. Not too acidic with a milder, sweeter flavor. Used for dishes with Asian flavors like sushi, pickled vegetables, and stir-frys.
Wine: Made from red or white wine. Has an acidic and sharp flavor that varies with the type of wine used. Used in marinades and salad dressings, and for cooking meat and fish.
Apple Cider: Made from the liquid of crushed apples. Lower acidity than other types with a faint apple flavor. Used for salads, salad dressings, marinades, and sweeter dishes.
Malt: Made from fermented un-hopped beer. Has a strong acidic flavor that is selected for sauces or dips.
With so many varieties, try gifting a new flavor experience to someone on your holiday gift list.

Flavored: A vinegar base (usually wine vinegar) that is infused with fruit purees or herbs like rosemary or sage to create unique flavors for vinaigrette dressings and marinades.

Recipe ideas and serving suggestions featuring vinegar:

Asparagus with Warm Tarragon-Pecan Vinaigrette
Quick-Pickled Beets & Fennel
Roasted Beets with Balsamic Vinegar
Mint Vinaigrette
Did You Know?

After cooking, the next most popular use for vinegar—particularly white vinegar—is cleaning. While the 5% acetic acid in vinegar is strong enough to kill some household pathogens, it does not kill them all (e.g., salmonella) and is not recommended as a replacement for commercial disinfectants. [1] However, distilled white vinegar is an inexpensive, nontoxic “green” product that may be useful for certain household chores. It appears to work particularly well on removing mineral deposits and soap scum, such as in sinks, drains, and shower stalls.

References

Last Reviewed October 2019

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.