Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Lemongrass Marinated Chicken Breast with Olive Couscous
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Lemongrass Marinated Chicken Breast with Olive Couscous
Lemongrass Marinated Chicken Breast with Olive Couscous
Recipe courtesy of Ming Tsai
Serves 4
Ingredients:

4 skin-on Statler chicken breasts, organic, naturally raised, free range and/or kosher
5 stalks lemongrass, minced (white part only)
2 shallots, minced
½ cup white wine
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, plus more to cook
1½ cups instant whole wheat couscous
2¼ cups water, boiling
¼ cup chopped black olives
Kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste
Preparation:

Preheat the oven to 375 degrees Fahrenheit.
In a large zip-top bag, combine chicken, lemongrass, shallots, white wine and extra virgin olive oil and marinate for 30 minutes. Remove chicken to a plate and season with kosher salt and freshly ground black pepper. Reserve the marinade to make a pan sauce with later.
In an oven-proof sauté pan over medium heat coated lightly with extra-virgin olive oil, sear the chicken, skin-side down, until browned. Flip chicken and finish in the oven.
Meanwhile, make the couscous: Place couscous in large, heat-proof bowl. Pour boiling water over couscous, add 1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil and season with salt and pepper. Stir quickly to blend and immediately cover bowl with plastic wrap, sealing tightly, and allow to steam until couscous is tender, about 5 minutes. Fluff couscous with the back of a fork.
Remove chicken breasts from pan and let rest 5 minutes. Place pan back on stove and transfer remaining marinade to the pan and bring to a boil. Add olives and about 1 tablespoon olive oil, stir to combine and heat through.
Serve family-style by placing chicken breasts over couscous. Garnish by spooning pan sauce over chicken.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/4 of recipe570 calories39 grams of protein58 grams of carbohydrates6 grams of fiber190 milligrams of sodium18 grams of fat( 4 grams of saturated fat11 grams of monounsaturated fat3 grams of polyunsaturated fat) 80 milligrams of cholesterol
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.