Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Braised Oyster Mushrooms, Coconut, and Macadamia
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Braised Oyster Mushrooms, Coconut, and Macadamia

For many people, mushrooms are prized for their ‘meatiness’. That chewy, toothsome quality makes mushrooms a great staple for those following plant-based diets. Mushrooms owe their meatiness to chitin—a polysaccharide and derivative of glucose—which makes up the cell walls of most fungi. Chitin is fibrous, absorbs water well, and is tough to break down. In fact, because of that toughness, it’s pretty hard to overcook mushrooms. They retain their texture even after hours of simmering. Here we pair briny, meaty oyster mushrooms with coconut for a warming dish you can whip up any night of the week. After searing the mushrooms, we simmer them in a mixture of coconut milk, garlic, and ginger. The mushrooms absorb the liquid and plump up, while retaining their meaty texture. We like these mushrooms over wild or black rice, with plenty of toasted macadamia nuts for crunch. But feel free to eat them over noodles, sweet potatoes, or just straight out of the pot.

Braised Oyster Mushrooms, Coconut, and Macadamia
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves 2
Ingredients:

1 13.5-ounce can light coconut milk
1 teaspoon cornstarch
2 tablespoons vegetable oil
8 ounces oyster mushrooms, torn into 2-inch pieces
1 clove garlic, grated
½-inch piece of ginger, grated
1/4 teaspoon fish sauce (optional)
1 cup black rice or wild rice
1/2 cup toasted macadamia nuts, chopped
Extra-virgin olive oil, for serving
Preparation:

Whisk coconut milk and cornstarch in medium bowl until combined and set aside. Heat oil in 12-inch skillet over medium-high heat until shimmering. Add mushrooms and 1/2 teaspoon salt and cook, turning once, until golden brown on most sides, about 5 to 7 minutes. Stir in garlic and ginger and cook until fragrant, about 30 seconds. Stir in coconut milk mixture and bring to boil. Reduce heat to low and simmer until mushrooms are tender and plump, 8 to 10 minutes longer. Season with fish sauce if desired and salt to taste. Set aside until ready to serve.
Meanwhile, bring 2 cups water to boil in medium saucepan. Stir in rice, 1/4 teaspoon salt, bring to simmer, reduce heat to low, cover and cook until rice has absorbed water, 20 to 25 minutes. Fluff rice with fork, cover and set aside. 
To serve, divide rice between two bowls. Spoon mushrooms over rice and pour coconut sauce on top. Sprinkle with macadamia nuts and serve.
Nutrition facts:
2842 calories20 grams of protein77 grams of carbohydrates10 grams of fiber5 grams of sugar275 milligrams of sodium644 milligrams of potassium55 grams of fat( 15 grams of saturated fat26 grams of monounsaturated fat10 grams of polyunsaturated fat)

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.