Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Walnut Pesto
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Walnut Pesto

These days, pesto is a simple staple sauce that lives on the shelves of most grocery stores. This pungent condiment goes great on everything—slathered over chicken, right on top of fish, and especially mixed into pasta or rice dishes. And despite its convenience, store-bought pesto tends to be expensive and lacks the vibrancy of the homemade stuff. Here we have a riff on pesto that employs walnuts instead of more traditional pine nuts. To keep our pesto vibrant green, we blanch a mix of basil and parsley (which contains more chlorophyll), locking in the color and resulting in a pesto that stays green longer. Toasting walnuts gives our pesto an earthier, buttery flavor, while a healthy dose of pepper reinforces the pungency of basil. The resulting pesto is bold green, packs a punch, and goes great with everything—though we might just as well eat it by the spoonful.

Walnut Pesto
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves Makes about 1 cup
Ingredients:

1 cup packed parsley
1 cup packed basil
Salt
¼ cup walnuts
¼ cup (½ ounce) parmesan cheese
3 cloves garlic
½ teaspoon pepper
½ cup extra-virgin olive oil
Preparation:

Fill medium bowl with ice water. Bring 2 quarts water to boil in large saucepan over high heat; add parsley, basil, and ½ teaspoon salt, return to boil, and cook until herbs are bright green and wilted, about 45 seconds. Drain herbs in fine mesh strainer and transfer immediately to ice water. When herbs no longer feel warm to touch, drain in strainer again and dry thoroughly with paper towels. Transfer herbs to bowl of food processor (break up herbs with fingers to distribute evenly).
Add walnuts, parmesan, garlic, pepper, and 1/2 teaspoon salt to food processor and pulse until finely ground, about 20 pulses. With processor running, add oil in steady stream until mixture is smooth and combined, 1 to 2 minutes. Season with salt and pepper to taste. Transfer pesto to airtight container until ready to use (pesto can be stored in refrigerator for up to one week).
Nutrition facts:
1/4 cup325 calories4 grams of protein4 grams of carbohydrates1 grams of fiber195 milligrams of sodium167 milligrams of potassium35 grams of fat( 5 grams of saturated fat21 grams of monounsaturated fat7 grams of polyunsaturated fat) 5 milligrams of cholesterol
Recipes featuring Walnut Pesto
Farro Risotto with Walnut Pesto
Risotto is typically made with rice, but there are plenty of grains you can use. Here’s one example that pairs farro with this earthy walnut pesto.
GET THE RECIPE.
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.