Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Lemon Chickpea Muffins
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Lemon Chickpea Muffins

Lemon and cardamom is a classic flavor pairing that make these muffins fragrant and delicious. Using pureed, canned chickpeas creates a very moist, tender muffin because the chickpea starch holds water so well. The addition of ground almonds to the batter contributes a hearty nuttiness as well as healthy fats. Pair these muffins with fresh fruit and yogurt for the occasional breakfast, or grab a muffin and a cup of tea or coffee for an afternoon snack.

Lemon Chickpea Muffins
Serves 12 muffins, or 28 mini muffins
Ingredients:

For batter
1¾ cup (271 g) chickpeas from a 15 oz. can, drained and rinsed
1 Tbsp. (12 g) lemon zest
1 Tbsp. (12 g) orange zest
2 Tbsp. (28 g) fresh lemon juice
2 Tbsp. (28 g) fresh orange juice
¼ cup (52 g) extra virgin olive oil
¼ cup (45 g) granulated sugar
2 egg yolks
⅔ cup (80 g) whole wheat flour, sifted
2 tsp. (8 g) baking powder
½ tsp. (2 g) salt
½ tsp. (2 g) ground cardamom
⅓ cup (30 g) ground almonds
2 egg whites
For topping
1 Tbsp. (8 g) ground or slivered almonds
¼ tsp. (1 g) ground cardamom
½ tsp. (2 g) granulated sugar (optional)
Preparation:

Preheat oven to 325 degrees Fahrenheit. Line muffin tin with paper liners.
Puree the chickpeas in a food processor until smooth.
Add the lemon and orange zest, juice, olive oil, sugar, and egg yolks. Puree until smooth.
Sift together the flour, baking powder, salt, and cardamom. Stir in the chickpea mixture, and then add the ground almonds.
Whisk the egg whites until they hold semi-soft peaks. Fold the egg whites into the batter carefully, so not to deflate the egg whites.
In a small bowl combine the ground or slivered almonds, sugar (optional), and cardamom. Set aside.
Scoop batter into muffin tin. You can use a ⅓ cup to do this, but you’ll only need to add a generous ¼ cup of batter to each muffin cup. Sprinkle the muffin batter with some of the almond-cardamom mixture.
Bake in the oven 12 to 13 minutes, or until a toothpick inserted in the center of a muffin comes out clean.

Nutrition information per serving (1 muffin, or 1/12 of recipe):

145 calories, 4 g protein, 16 g carbohydrate, 1 g fiber, 5 g sugar (4 g added sugar*), 195 mg sodium, 90 mg potassium, 7 g fat (1 g sat, 5 g mono, 1 g poly, 0 g trans), 25 mg cholesterol

*Includes optional ½ tsp. (2g) granulated sugar in topping

Recipe courtesy of The Culinary Institute of America

Related
The Great Muffin Makeover
Blueberry Muffin Battle
Harvard Chan Cooks: recipe videos

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.