Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Simple Celery Date Salad
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Simple Celery Date Salad
Simple Celery Date Salad
Recipe courtesy of Mollie Katzen/Harvard University Dining Services
Serves 2
Ingredients:

3 large stalks celery, very thinly sliced (ok to include some of the nicer leaves)
1 tablespoon olive oil
2 teaspoons fresh lemon juice
4 to 6 dates, chopped
1 teaspoon light-colored honey (optional)
Black pepper
1 to 2 ounces high-quality blue cheese, crumbled (optional)
Pear slices for garnish (optional)
Preparation:

Toss together the celery, olive oil, lemon juice, dates, and honey. Sprinkle with black pepper and toss again. At this point, the salad can be covered and refrigerated for up to two days.
Serve cold, with a little blue cheese crumbled on top, if desired; note that if you add the blue cheese sooner, it blends into the dressing. If you wait and then sprinkle it on top at serving, it will be more distinct. It’s your call, as this is good either way. You may serve with slices of pear tucked into the side as well; tossing the pear slices with lemon juice prior to plating will help keep them from turning brown. Pass a pepper mill.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/2 of recipe, including blue cheese270 calories7 grams of protein27 grams of carbohydrates4 grams of fiber420 milligrams of sodium15 grams of fat( 6 grams of saturated fat8 grams of monounsaturated fat1 grams of polyunsaturated fat) 20 milligrams of cholesterol

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.