Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Strategies to reduce red meat and elevate your plate > Prioritize hearty and savory plant-based preparations
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Prioritize hearty and savory plant-based preparations
Elevate your plate: Reducing red meat in our diets can be a win for our own health and the health of the planet. If you’re not quite sure where to start, these strategies can help you cut-back the red meat while keeping your meals filling and flavorful.

You might think a plate devoid of meat is incomplete—questioning whether it will fill you up, be too expensive, give you enough protein, be lacking in flavor or texture, etc. If that’s been your experience, don’t be discouraged. While this approach doesn’t incorporate any animal products, it doesn’t mean you have to remove them from your diet completely. Rather, it shares some simple strategies for creating filling, delicious, and even budget-friendly plant-based preparations.

Start here:
Incorporate umami: alongside sweet, salty, sour, and bitter, umami is the fifth well-recognized taste, which is typically described as a “savory, meaty taste.” True to its description, umami foods often include red meats and poultry, eggs and certain cheeses, and a wide range of seafood. However, there are a number of umami-packed plant-based foods that can provide this savory, meaty, rich taste when you’re cooking without animal foods. For example, fermented products like soy sauce and miso; sea vegetables; green tea; toasted nuts and seeds; savory spices like cumin and smoked paprika; and a range of vegetables, including tomatoes, asparagus, winter squash, sweet potatoes, and carrots.
Roasting, grilling, sautéing and caramelizing vegetables increases the umami as well, as this process breaks down the protein to release the flavor.
Mushrooms also stand out for their umami-rich flavor, which, combined with their “meaty” texture can make a great replacement for beef.
Build texture, protein, and satiety with legumes and nuts: Legumes (like beans, soybeans, peas, lentils), nuts (like almonds, walnuts, and pecans), and seeds (chia, hempseed) can stand in for animal-based protein foods, while providing an array of other nutrients. Same goes for products made from them, such as nut butters and soy foods (like tofu or tempeh) or other plant-based products, like veggie burgers (note that with any highly processed product, plant-based or not, it’s important to look out for extra sodium, saturated fat from tropical oils, or other additives).
Legumes are worth calling out in particular, for human health and planetary health. For example, just one cup of cooked lentils provides 18 grams of protein and 15 grams of fiber, and it has virtually no saturated fat (for comparison, 4 ounces of ground beef provides 14 grams of protein, no fiber, and 11 grams of saturated fat). And beyond their lower impact on greenhouse gas emissions, legumes are also known for helping replace nitrogen in the soil.
Texturally, lentils even resemble ground beef when cooked, and when paired with umami-packed vegetables, like mushrooms, can even mimic the taste. Try them anywhere you’d used crumbled cooked ground beef. For example:
Hearty lentils, savory portabella mushrooms, umami-packed tomatoes, and sautéed onions combine with brown rice to deliver a surprisingly “meaty” bell pepper filling—but without the red meat.
GET THE RECIPE.
For building the rest of the dish, incorporate minimally processed whole grains, which will boost texture and also provide some protein. Cook your whole grains in low-sodium vegetable broth for even more flavor.
What else can I do?

As you can see (and try for yourself, following these tips!), plant-based meals can indeed be filling and flavorful on their own. However, if you happen to have leftover chicken or feel like having an egg or some cheese, these tips can help provide a solid base for incorporating animal-based foods into your meals. For some ideas and recipes on how to do so, check out:

Consume less meat, enjoy more variety
SEE THE TIPS.
More plate upgrades:
Swap out red meat for healthier meats
If you’re thinking of a meal that features red meat, see if you can replace it with a better option, like poultry or seafood.
Eat a little less red meat, any way you can
Assess how often you eat red meat, and see if one of these strategies can help you find a way to cut back a bit.

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.