Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Cauliflower and Walnut Soup
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Cauliflower and Walnut Soup

When it comes to making smooth, velvety vegetable soups, cauliflower is kind of a secret weapon. This brassica is low in overall fiber when cooked (compared to say, carrots or broccoli), making it ideal for smooth purees and sauces. In fact, this soup is so smooth and creamy that you’d be hard pressed to believe there isn’t any dairy in it. And to elevate this soup even more, we blend in toasted walnuts to thicken the soup slightly. The walnuts also provide richness, a background sweetness, and a pleasant buttery quality. For some textural contrast, we serve the soup with some pan-roasted cauliflower and plenty of extra toasted walnuts.

Cauliflower and Walnut Soup
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves 6
Ingredients:

1 head cauliflower (2 pounds)
6 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
1 onion, halved and sliced thin
Salt
5 cups water
½ cup (2 ounces) toasted walnuts
½ teaspoon mustard powder
¼ teaspoon cumin
1 teaspoon lemon juice
Preparation:

Pull leaves off cauliflower and trim stem. Using small knife, cut around core to remove; thinly slice core and reserve. Cut 1 cup of 1/2-inch florets from head of cauliflower; set aside. Cut remaining cauliflower crosswise into 1/2-inch thick pieces.
Melt 2 tablespoons oil in large pot over medium heat. Add onion and 1 1/2 teaspoons salt and cook, stirring occasionally, until onion is softened, about 6 minutes.
Increase heat to high; add 4 1/2 cups water, sliced core, and half of sliced cauliflower; and bring to simmer. Reduce heat to medium-low and simmer gently for 15 minutes. Add remaining sliced cauliflower, return to simmer, and continue to cook until cauliflower is tender, 15 to 20 minutes longer.
While soup simmers, melt remaining 4 tablespoons oil in 8-inch skillet over medium heat. Add reserved florets and cook, stirring frequently, until florets are golden brown, 6 to 8 minutes. Off heat, stir in mustard powder and cumin. Remove skillet from heat and transfer florets to small bowl. Toss florets with lemon juice and season with salt to taste.
Process soup and walnuts in blender until smooth, about 60 seconds. Rinse out pot. Strain pureed soup through fine-mesh strainer into pot, pressing on solids to extract as much liquid as possible. Return soup to simmer over medium heat, adjusting consistency with remaining water as needed (soup should have thick, silky texture but settle flat in bowl) and seasoning with salt to taste. Serve, garnishing individual bowls with browned florets, extra walnuts, and extra olive oil.
Nutrition facts:
1 serving244 calories5 grams of protein9 grams of carbohydrates3 grams of fiber3 grams of sugar418 milligrams of sodium463 milligrams of potassium23 grams of fat( 3 grams of saturated fat10 grams of monounsaturated fat2 grams of polyunsaturated fat)

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.