Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Quinoa Enchilada Casserole
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Quinoa Enchilada Casserole

Quinoa, beans, and chiles combine with enchilada spices in this simple yet satisfying casserole. (See more recipes from Always Delicious). 

Quinoa Enchilada Casserole
Prep Time 10 minutes
Cook Time 1 hour
Serves 4
Ingredients:

For the Enchilada Sauce
1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil
1 tablespoon chili powder, or to taste
1/2 teaspoon dried Mexican oregano or regular oregano
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin
1/2 teaspoon garlic powder
1/2 teaspoon onion powder
1 (14.5‑ounce) can diced tomatoes
1/4 teaspoon salt, or to taste
1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper, or to taste
For the Casserole
2 cups Cooked Quinoa
3 tablespoons chopped Anaheim or other mild chile (about 1/2 chile)
2 cups cooked beans or drained and rinsed canned beans, such as black beans, chickpeas, pinto beans, or a combination
8 or 9 sprigs cilantro, chopped
1/2 teaspoon ground cumin
1/2 teaspoon chili powder
1/4 teaspoon salt, or more as needed
1/4 teaspoon ground black pepper, or to taste
1 cup shredded cheese, such as cheddar or mozzarella
1 avocado, diced, for garnish
2 Roma (plum) tomatoes, diced, for garnish
Preparation:

Preheat the oven to 375 degrees Fahrenheit.
Make the enchilada sauce:
Heat the olive oil in a medium pot over medium heat.
Stir together the chili powder, oregano, cumin, garlic powder, and onion powder in a bowl.
Add the spices to the hot oil all at once. Cook, stirring, for a few seconds to allow the spices to become fragrant and infuse the oil with flavor without burning.
Add the tomatoes, salt, and pepper. Bring to a boil. Reduce the heat to low, cover, and simmer for 10 minutes.
Puree directly in the pot with an immersion blender. (If the sauce is not deep enough to fully immerse the blender and prevent splattering, carefully transfer the sauce to a deep bowl or jar to blend. Return to the pan after blending.)
Simmer for 5 minutes more to slightly reduce the sauce. Taste and adjust the seasonings. Set aside. (This sauce can be made ahead and stored in an airtight container in the refrigerator for up to 2 weeks and reheated for quicker prep.)
Assemble the casserole: In a 9‑inch square casserole dish, combine the quinoa, enchilada sauce, chile, beans, cilantro, cumin, chili powder, salt, pepper, and 3/4 cup of the cheese. Adjust the seasonings. Sprinkle the remaining 1/4 cup cheese evenly over the top.
Bake until bubbling and the cheese has melted, about 15 minutes.
Serve immediately, garnished with the avocado and fresh tomato.

Recipe from Always Delicious by David Ludwig, MD, PH & Chef Dawn Ludwig. Published by Grand Central Life & Style. Copyright © 2018 David Ludwig, MD, PH & Dawn Ludwig.

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.