Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > French Style Lentils
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
French Style Lentils

Lentils get a bad rep for being bland, muddy, and mushy. But they don’t have to be that way. Here’s a dish of lentils prepared in the classic French style—straight up, with simple aromatics and a little attention to detail. Cooking the lentils in a mixture of water, carrots, garlic, and bay leaves ensures plenty of base flavor. To keep the lentils from overcooking and to preserve their toothsome texture, we rinse the cooked lentils under cold water, washing out excess starch and stopping the cooking process. We fold the lentils and carrots back into a combination of rendered shallots, wine, stock, and a little more oil. To give some welcome brightness and a little kick, we finish the dish with a bit of whole grain mustard and a splash of red wine vinegar. This is a simple, hearty dish that’s a great introduction to this versatile legume—and a perfect way to stay warm on those bitter winter nights. You can use black (beluga) lentils, brown lentils, green lentils, or lentils du Puy for this recipe. Do not use red lentils or lentils with their hulls removed.

French Style Lentils
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves 4
Ingredients:

1 cup black lentils, rinsed and picked over
4 cups water
1 carrot, peeled, halved lengthwise, and cut into 4 pieces
1 garlic clove, smashed lightly
2 bay leaves
Salt and pepper
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
1 shallot, chopped fine
2 tablespoons sherry wine or dry white wine
3/4 cup low-sodium vegetable broth
2 teaspoons whole grain mustard, plus extra for serving
2 teaspoons red wine vinegar, plus extra for serving
1/2 cup greek yogurt
2 tablespoons minced chives
Preparation:

Bring lentils, water, carrots, garlic, bay leaves, and 1 teaspoon salt in 12-inch skillet to simmer over medium-high heat. Reduce heat to low and simmer uncovered, skimming any foam off top as it rises to surface, until lentils are just cooked through and have slight bite, 20 to 25 minutes. Drain lentils in colander set over large bowl, reserving carrots; discard garlic and bay leaves. Chop carrots into 1/4-inch pieces and set aside. Wipe skillet clean with paper towel. Run cold water over lentils until water runs clear, about 3 changes of water. Drain lentils and set aside.  
Heat 1 tablespoon oil in now-empty skillet over medium heat until shimmering. Stir in shallots and ½ teaspoon salt and cook, stirring occasionally, until softened but not browned, about 2 minutes. Stir in wine and cook until liquid has nearly evaporated, about 30 seconds. Stir in broth and remaining 2 tablespoons oil, bring mixture to simmer, and cook, swirling pan occasionally, until mixture is smooth and combined, about 30 seconds. Stir in lentils and reserved carrots and cook, stirring occasionally, until lentils are heated through and well coated, about 2 minutes longer. Off heat, stir in mustard and vinegar. Season with salt and pepper to taste. Sprinkle with chives and serve, passing extra mustard and vinegar.
Nutrition facts:
1 serving276 calories12 grams of protein27 grams of carbohydrates12 grams of fiber4 grams of sugar241 milligrams of sodium526 milligrams of potassium14 grams of fat( 3 grams of saturated fat8 grams of monounsaturated fat1 grams of polyunsaturated fat) 9 milligrams of cholesterol
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.