Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Barley Roasted Portobello and Fennel Salad
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Barley Roasted Portobello and Fennel Salad

One of the best ways to maximize the earthy qualities of a mushroom is to cook it with something similarly earthy. Ancient grains like barley, farro, and wheat berries, or even brown rice provide plenty of earthy notes on their own. But with a little heat and time, these grains undergo a unique transformation: They become toasty, nutty, and take on flavors reminiscent of caramel and even umami-rich soy sauce. Here we take advantage of this idea by roasting portobello mushrooms in toasted, hulless barley grains. Wrapping the mushrooms creates steam while roasting, concentrating the barley flavors while keeping the mushrooms tender and juicy. After roasting, we blend some of the barley to create a rich, nutty sauce that gets a little extra boost from miso. We cook the rest of the roasted barley and incorporate it into a fresh fennel salad to serve along with the mushrooms. This is a complex, deeply savory mushroom dish that highlights what is possible with relatively few ingredients. Be sure to use hulless barley, as opposed to unhulled or pearled barley. For best results, use a high-powered blender in step 3.

Barley Roasted Portobello and Fennel Salad
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves 4
Ingredients:

1 cup (7 ounces) hulless barley, toasted
4 (4- to 6-ounce) portobello mushrooms
1 tablespoon plus 3/4 cup vegetable oil, divided
1 teaspoon Kosher salt
1 bulb fennel, sliced thin, fronds reserved
1 tablespoon white miso
1 tablespoon lemon juice, plus extra for serving
Preparation:

Adjust oven rack to middle position and heat oven to 425 degrees F. Line 13-inch baking dish with parchment paper and spray with baking spray. Spread barley on parchment in even layer. Brush mushrooms with 1 tablespoon oil and season on both sides with salt. Place mushrooms, stem-side down on barley. Cover dish tightly with aluminum foil, crimping edges to seal. Roast mushrooms until fragrant and tender, 45 to 55 minutes. Remove foil and let mushrooms cool until cool enough to handle, about 10 minutes.
Transfer mushrooms to cutting board, cleaning any barley from gills. Cut mushrooms into ½-inch slices and set aside. Add 1/2 cup roasted barley to pot along with 3 cups water. Bring barley to boil, reduce heat to low, and simmer until barley is just tender, 35 to 40 minutes. Drain barley and set aside. 
Meanwhile, transfer remaining 1/2 cup roasted barley to blender jar and blend on high speed until barley resembles coarse powder, about 2 minutes. With blender running, pour remaining 3/4 cup vegetable oil in steady stream and blend until mixture is smooth, about 2 minutes longer. Add miso and blend until smooth and combined, about 30 seconds. Strain barley oil through fine-mesh strainer set over bowl, stirring solids to extract as much liquid as possible. Whisk in lemon juice until smooth and combined and set aside.
To Serve: Combine fennel, cooked barley, and 2 tablespoons barley sauce in bowl and toss to coat evenly. Pour remaining barley sauce on large serving platter. Place fennel salad on top and drizzle with lemon juice to taste. Arrange mushrooms on fennel and drizzle with any remaining sauce. Sprinkle with fennel fronds and serve. 
Nutrition facts:
4534 calories6 grams of protein39 grams of carbohydrates7 grams of fiber3 grams of sugar497 milligrams of sodium294 milligrams of potassium47 grams of fat( 7 grams of saturated fat10 grams of monounsaturated fat29 grams of polyunsaturated fat)

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.