Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Healthy Spaces for Youth 
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Healthy Spaces for Youth 

Out-of-school time programs are supervised settings that school-aged children regularly attend when school is not in session. They include before- and after- school programs; specialty programs (sports teams, STEM); and other programs providing various activities (Boys and Girls Clubs, YMCA, 21st Century Community Learning Centers, etc.) With 7.8 million U.S. children attending afterschool programs in 2020, these are key settings for improving children’s food and beverage intake, providing physical activity opportunities, and limiting TV exposure. [1]

Healthy Eating Outside of School

Improving the quality of children’s snacks offered during out-of-school time could positively impact children’s health by increasing the intake of healthier food and beverages, such as fruits, vegetables, whole grains and water. Snacks account for 27% of total calorie intake among youth, and most frequently consist of grain-based desserts, salty snacks, sweets, and sugary beverages, which are associated with increased obesity risk. [2,3]

Snacks and beverages that children bring to afterschool programs are usually less healthy than snacks served from federal reimbursable meal programs such as the National School Lunch Program, Child and Adult Care Food Program, and the Summer Food Service Program. [4,5] Policies limiting non-program snacks and/or sugary beverages being brought in for snacks could improve the nutritional quality snacks during out-of-school time.

Best practice guidance for healthy eating during out-of-school time  

Provide healthy food and beverage choices consistent with the federal reimbursable meal programs [6,7]
Do not allow children to bring in their own snacks to afterschool programs
Serve a fruit or vegetable at every snack
Serve water at every snack and meal, and make sure it is available at all times
When serving grains for snack (like bread, crackers and cereal), serve whole grains
Serve water instead of sugary drinks at every snack or meal
Limit juice servings to 4 ounces of 100% juice
Key resource
The Out-of-School Nutrition and Physical Activity Initiative (OSNAP) is an evidence-based initiative that helps out-of-school time programs improve policies and practices to help kids move more and eat healthier snacks. The goal of OSNAP is to support policy and practice strategies that promote nutrition and physical activity in out-of-school-time settings. OSNAP focuses on six nutrition and physical activity goals. It provides training, tools, and resources to help programs make sustainable changes to promote increased physical activity and consumption of healthy snacks.
Physical Activity

Encouraging students to be physically active during out-of-school time can help promote health and well-being. Before- and after-school programs as well as physical activity clubs and intramural/extramural sports are important components of a comprehensive approach to increase physical activity.

In addition to physical activity programming during out-of-school programs, walking and biking programs encouraging active transport to and from school is another method of increasing physical activity among children.

Best practice guidance for physical activity during out-of-school time

Provide children with at least 30 minutes of moderate to vigorous physical activity every day
Offer at least 20 minutes of vigorous physical activity on 3 or more days per week
Offer physical activity opportunities including competitive and non-competitive activities
Screen Time

Excess TV viewing can lead to overeating and a higher risk for becoming overweight because when children watch TV, then tend to snack more and see advertising for high-calorie, high-sugar foods like candy, soda, and fast foods. [8] Limiting screen time and television with advertisements during out-of-school time promotes healthy environments for children.

Best practice guidance for screen time during out-of-school time

Eliminate broadcast and cable TV or movies, and limit computer and digital device time to educational or instructional only
Out-of-School Time Staff Training

Trainings and professional development in the areas of healthy eating and physical activity will ensure that staff are adequately trained to support healthy behaviors among youth participating in out-of-school programs.

Best practice guidance for staff and education curriculum for health promotion in out-of-school time

Staff receive training on the role of healthy eating, physical activity, and social supports for healthy behaviors at least once per year, and new staff are oriented and trained on this information upon hire
Staff model and promote healthy eating and physical activity
Program uses a curriculum that is grounded in science such as CATCH Kids Club, YMCA’s Food and Fun After School, or OSNAP.
Related resources
Related
Healthy Food Environment
Active Communities
Healthy Schools
Healthy Child Care Settings
Packing a Healthy Lunchbox
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
References

Last reviewed March 2024

HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.