Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Calcium
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Calcium

Calcium is a mineral most often associated with healthy bones and teeth, although it also plays an important role in blood clotting, helping muscles to contract, and regulating normal heart rhythms and nerve functions. About 99% of the body’s calcium is stored in bones, and the remaining 1% is found in blood, muscle, and other tissues.

In order to perform these vital daily functions, the body works to keep a steady amount of calcium in the blood and tissues. If calcium levels drop too low in the blood, parathyroid hormone (PTH) will signal the bones to release calcium into the bloodstream. This hormone may also activate vitamin D to improve the absorption of calcium in the intestines. At the same time, PTH signals the kidneys to release less calcium in the urine. When the body has enough calcium, a different hormone called calcitonin works to do the opposite: it lowers calcium levels in the blood by stopping the release of calcium from bones and signaling the kidneys to rid more of it in the urine.

The body gets the calcium it needs in two ways. One is by eating foods or supplements that contain calcium, and the other is by drawing from calcium in the body. If one does not eat enough calcium-containing foods, the body will remove calcium from bones. Ideally, the calcium that is “borrowed” from the bones will be replaced at a later point. But this doesn’t always happen, and can’t always be accomplished just by eating more calcium.

Recommended Amounts

The Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) for calcium for women 19-50 years of age is 1,000 mg daily; for women 51+, 1,200 mg. For pregnant and lactating women, the RDA is 1,000 mg. For men 19-70 years of age, the RDA is 1,000 mg; for men 71+ years, 1,200 mg. [1]

Calcium and Health

The reviews below specifically looked at the effect of calcium on various health conditions. Scroll down for links to more information on the health effect of specific foods rich in calcium.

Blood pressure
Cardiovascular disease
Bone health
Colorectal cancer
Kidney stones
Food Sources

Calcium is widely available* in many foods, not just milk and other dairy foods. Fruits, leafy greens, beans, nuts, and some starchy vegetables are good sources.

Dairy (cow, goat, sheep) and fortified plant-based milks (almond, soy, rice)
Cheese
Yogurt
Calcium-fortified orange juice
Winter squash
Edamame (young green soybeans); Tofu, made with calcium sulfate
Canned sardines, salmon (with bones)
Almonds
Leafy greens (collard, mustard, turnip, kale, bok choy, spinach)
*Bioavailability of calcium
Calcium is a large mineral and not so easy to break down in the gut. The amount of calcium listed on the Nutrition Facts label of a food product is the measure of calcium in the food, but not necessarily the amount the body will absorb. The amount that is actually absorbed and used by the body is called “calcium bioavailablity.” Some foods have higher calcium bioavailability than others. For example, dairy foods have a bioavailablity of about 30% absorption so if a food label on milk lists 300 mg of calcium per cup, about 100 mg will be absorbed and used by the body. Plant foods like leafy greens contain less calcium overall but have a higher bioavailability than dairy. For example, bok choy contains about 160 mg of calcium per 1 cup cooked but has a higher bioavailability of 50%, so about 80 mg is absorbed. Therefore, eating 1 cup of cooked bok choy has almost as much bioavailable calcium as 1 cup of milk. Calcium-fortified orange juice and calcium-set tofu have a similar total amount of calcium and bioavailability as milk, while almonds have slightly lower total calcium and bioavailability of about 20%. This may be useful information for those who cannot eat dairy foods or who follow a vegan diet. A downside to some plant foods is that they contain naturally occurring plant substances, sometimes referred to as “anti-nutrients.” Examples of anti-nutrients are oxalates and phytates that bind to calcium and decrease its bioavailablity. Spinach contains the most calcium of all the leafy greens at 260 mg of calcium per 1 cup cooked, but it is also high in oxalates, lowering the bioavailability so that only 5% or about 13 mg of calcium can be used by the body. The takeaway message is not to avoid spinach, which contains other valuable nutrients, but not to rely on spinach as a significant source of calcium since most of it will not be absorbed by the body. You can also schedule your meals so that you do not eat “calcium-binding” foods like spinach at the same meal as calcium-rich foods or with calcium supplements. If you are scanning food labels to reach a specific amount of daily calcium, continue to aim for the RDAs set for your age group and gender. The RDAs are established with an understanding of calcium bioavailability in food. Also keep in mind that the exact amount of calcium absorbed in the body will vary among individuals based on their metabolism and what other foods are eaten at the same meal. In general, eating a variety of calcium-rich foods can help to offset any small losses.
Signs of Deficiency and Toxicity
Deficiency

Blood levels of calcium are tightly regulated. Bones will release calcium into the blood if the diet does not provide enough, and no symptoms usually occur. A more serious deficiency of calcium, called hypocalcemia, results from diseases such as kidney failure, surgeries of the digestive tract like gastric bypass, or medications like diuretics that interfere with absorption.

Symptoms of hypocalcemia:

Muscle cramps or weakness
Numbness or tingling in fingers
Abnormal heart rate
Poor appetite

A gradual, progressive calcium deficiency can occur in people who do not get enough dietary calcium in the long-term or who lose the ability to absorb calcium. The first early stage of bone loss is called osteopenia and, if untreated, osteoporosis follows. Examples of people at risk include:

Postmenopausal women—Menopause lowers the amount of estrogen in the body, a hormone that helps to increase calcium absorption and retain the mineral in bones. Sometimes physicians may prescribe hormone replacement therapy (HRT) with estrogen and progesterone to prevent osteoporosis.
Amenorrhea—A condition where menstrual periods stop early or are disrupted, and is often seen in younger women with anorexia nervosa or athletes who physically train at a very high level.
Milk allergy or lactose intolerance—Occurs when the body cannot digest the sugar in milk, lactose, or the proteins in milk, casein or whey. Lactose intolerance can be genetic or acquired (not consuming lactose in the long-term may decrease the efficiency of lactase enzyme)
Guidelines if you are taking calcium supplements for osteoporosis
Toxicity

Too much calcium in the blood is called hypercalcemia. The Upper Limit (UL) for calcium is 2,500 mg daily from food and supplements. People over the age of 50 should not take more than 2,000 mg daily, especially from supplements, as this can increase risk of some conditions like kidney stones, prostate cancer, and constipation. Some research has shown that in certain people, calcium can accumulate in blood vessels with long-term high doses and cause heart problems. Calcium is also a large mineral that can block the absorption of other minerals like iron and zinc.

Symptoms of hypercalcemia:

Weakness, fatigue
Nausea, vomiting
Shortness of breath
Chest pain
Heart palpitations, irregular heart rate
Did You Know?

Certain nutrients and medications may increase your need for calcium because they either lower the absorption of calcium in the gut or cause more calcium to be excreted in the urine. These include: corticosteroids (example: prednisone), excess sodium in the diet, phosphoric acid such as found in dark cola sodas, excess alcohol, and oxalates (see Are anti-nutrients harmful?).

Related

Vitamins and Minerals

References

Last reviewed March 2023

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.