Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Marinated Shiitake Mushroom and Cucumber Salad
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Marinated Shiitake Mushroom and Cucumber Salad

In Japanese and Chinese cuisine, dried shiitake mushrooms are a staple of the pantry. Drying is an age-old preservation technique, increasing shelf life indefinitely. But drying also intensifies the flavor of mushrooms, driving off moisture and leaving precious glutamates intact. Rehydrating unlocks all of these flavors, and best of all, dried mushrooms become meatier than ever before. Here is our take on classic marinated shiitakes—one of the best ways to enjoy these fungi. After rehydrating the mushrooms, we slice them to increase surface area. Simmering the mushrooms in an intense mixture of soy sauce, wine, vinegar, and plenty of the reserved cooking liquid results in ultra-meaty gems of umami goodness. These mushrooms go well with anything, from soups to stews to salads and rice bowls. We serve ours simply, with fresh, crunchy cucumber and fragrant toasted sesame seeds. This dish is perfect with steamed rice as a light lunch, or as a side dish for a bigger feast. You can find dried shiitake mushrooms at any Asian grocery store, usually in bulk. 

Marinated Shiitake Mushroom and Cucumber Salad
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves 4-6
Ingredients:

Mushrooms
4 cups (about 4 ounces) dried shiitake mushrooms
1 cup reduced-sodium soy sauce
3/4 cup sake or dry white wine
1/4 cup white wine vinegar
1/4 cup honey

1 1-inch piece ginger, peeled

Salad

1 seedless English cucumber, sliced 1/4-inch thick
1 tablespoon lemon juice, plus extra for serving
1 tablespoon toasted sesame seeds
Extra-virgin olive oil
Preparation:

For the Mushrooms: Bring 4 cups water to boil in large saucepan. Off heat, add mushrooms, cover, and let hydrate until mushrooms are softened and plump, 15 to 20 minutes. Strain mushrooms in fine-mesh strainer set over bowl; reserve liquid and set aside. Let mushrooms cool slightly, then cut into 1/4-inch slices. Add sliced mushrooms back to now-empty pot. Stir in 2 cups reserved cooking liquid, soy sauce, sake, vinegar, honey, and ginger until combined. Bring mixture to simmer over medium heat, reduce heat to low, and cook, stirring occasionally, until mushrooms absorb cooking liquid and turn brown, about 30 minutes. Off heat, cover pot and let mushrooms cool to room temperature.
For the Salad: Toss cucumbers with lemon juice in large bowl. Arrange cucumbers on large plate, then arrange mushrooms over top. Pour 1/2 cup cooking liquid over salad and sprinkle with sesame seeds. Drizzle with lemon juice and olive oil to taste. Serve.
Nutrition facts:
5210 calories5 grams of protein36 grams of carbohydrates3 grams of fiber16 grams of sugar( 14 grams of added sugar )927 milligrams of sodium410 milligrams of potassium3 grams of fat( 2 grams of monounsaturated fat)
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.