Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Jalapeño Cheddar Corn Muffins
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Jalapeño Cheddar Corn Muffins

A small amount of flavorful sharp cheddar contrasts nicely with the sweetness of the cornmeal batter, and the spiciness of the chopped jalapeño.

Jalapeño Cheddar Corn Muffins
Serves 18 muffins or 40 mini muffins
Ingredients:

¾ cup (120 g) non-degerminated cornmeal
1 cup (220 g) low fat (1%) buttermilk
½ cup (120)g warm water
1 ¾ cup (225 g) white whole wheat flour
¾ cup (90 g) whole wheat pastry flour
¼ cup (45 g) granulated sugar
2 ½ tsp. (10 g) baking powder
½ tsp. (2 g) salt
1 egg yolk
⅔ cup (130 g) extra virgin olive oil
½ tsp. (4 g) vanilla extract
1 Tbsp. (24 g) agave nectar (or honey)
2 egg whites
½ cup (66 g) jalapeño peppers, diced
½ cup (78 g) corn kernels, frozen and thawed
½ cup (64 g) sharp cheddar cheese, finely shredded
Preparation:

Preheat oven to 375 degrees Fahrenheit. Line muffin tins with paper liners.
In a small mixing bowl, soak the cornmeal in 1 cup of buttermilk and ½ cup of warm water for 10 to 15 minutes.
Meanwhile, mix the white whole wheat flour, whole wheat pastry flour, sugar, baking powder, and salt in a medium size mixing bowl.
In stand mixer that has been outfitted with the paddle attachment beat the egg yolk with the extra virgin olive oil, vanilla, and agave (or honey) for two minutes until combined. Add the cornmeal-buttermilk mixture and mix to combine.
Add the dry ingredients in three stages, scraping the bowl down after each addition.
Fold in the jalapeno peppers, corn kernels, and cheddar cheese.
Whip the reserved egg whites to medium peak. Add a small amount of the white to the batter and mix in, to lighten the batter. Add the remaining whites and fold carefully to fully incorporate while taking care not to deflate the lightened batter.
Scoop into muffin tins. Fill the tins two-thirds full.
Bake for 20 to 22 minutes.

Nutrition information per serving (1 muffin, or 1/18 of recipe):

195 calories, 4 g protein, 22 g carbohydrate, 3 g fiber, 5 g sugar (4 g added sugar), 150 mg sodium, 40 mg potassium, 5 g fat (2 g sat, 6.5 g mono, 1 g poly, 0 g trans), 15 mg cholesterol

Recipe courtesy of The Culinary Institute of America

Related
The Great Muffin Makeover

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.