Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Cranberry Orange Muffins
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Cranberry Orange Muffins

The classic combination of cranberry and orange, in muffin form.

Cranberry Orange Muffins
Serves 18 muffins or 32 mini muffins
Ingredients:

¾ cup (102 g) dried cranberries
¾ cup (177 g) boiling water
1 ½ cups (180 g) white whole wheat flour
1 Tbsp. (8 g) cornstarch
¾ cup (64 g) almond flour
⅓ cup (60 g) granulated sugar
1½ tsp. (7 g) baking powder
½ tsp. (2 g) salt
1 egg yolk
⅔ cup (130 g) canola oil
1 Tbsp. (26 g) agave nectar (or honey)
4 Tbsp. (60 g) buttermilk
½ tsp. (4 g) vanilla extract
½ cup (121 g) low fat (1%) Greek yogurt
2 tsp. (8 g) orange zest
2 egg whites
Preparation:

Preheat the oven to 375 degrees Fahrenheit. Line muffin tins with paper liners.
Pour boiling water over the dried cranberries and allow them to soak for 10 minutes.
In a medium mixing bowl, stir together all the dry ingredients.
In the bowl of a stand mixer that is outfitted with a paddle attachment, place the egg yolk, oil, agave, buttermilk, vanilla, and yogurt and mix for two minutes until combined.
Add the dry ingredients in three stages, mixing on low speed and scraping the sides of the bowl with each addition.
Drain the cranberries, discard the water, and add the cranberries to the batter along with the orange zest. Mix to combine.
In a medium bowl, whisk the egg white to medium peaks. Add a small amount of the egg whites to the batter and stir to combine (this will help lighten the batter a bit). Fold the remaining egg whites into the batter, carefully so as not to deflate the whites.
Scoop into muffin tins. Fill the tins three-quarters full. Bake 20 to 22 minutes.

Nutrition information per serving (1 muffin, or 1/18 of recipe):

186 calories, 3 g protein, 19 g carbohydrate, 2 g fiber, 9 g sugar (5 g added sugar),90 mg sodium, 5 mg potassium, 9 g fat (1 g sat, 5.5 g mono, 2.5 g poly, 0 g trans), 10 mg cholesterol

Recipe courtesy of The Culinary Institute of America

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.