Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Spicy Broccolini with Red Pepper
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Spicy Broccolini with Red Pepper

Most supermarkets offer broccolini, which looks similar to rapini, but the flavor is less bitter. You can steam, boil, or stir-fry broccoli or rapini. Nina likes to blanch these types of vegetables in advance until near-tender, refresh them, and then stir-fry over very high heat just before serving.

Spicy Broccolini with Red Pepper
Recipe courtesy of Nina Simonds
Serves 6
Ingredients:

2 pounds broccolini, rapini, Chinese or western broccoli or flowering rape
2 tablespoons virgin olive oil
1 teaspoon crushed dried chili flakes
1 small red bell pepper, cored, seeded, and cut into ¼-inch dice
6 cloves garlic, smashed with the flat edge of a knife, skins removed, and sliced thinly
1 teaspoon salt to taste
Juice of ½ lemon, or about 2½ tablespoons
Preparation:

Cut away the tough end of the broccolini or rapini, and peel away the tough outer skin from the stems. Separate the stalks or tougher part of the vegetable from the more tender part (flowerets). Cut the stalks into 1-inch lengths and separate the flowerets.
Bring 3 quarts water to a boil, add the tougher part (stalks) of the vegetable and cook for about 2 minutes or until almost tender, but al dente. Add the remaining part of the vegetable and cook for another minute, or until the vegetable is tender. Drain and refresh briefly in cold water. Drain again.
Heat a wok or a heavy skillet, add the oil, and heat until hot, about 15 seconds. Add the chili flakes, red pepper, and sliced garlic. Stir-fry over medium-high heat for 2 minutes or until the red pepper is slightly tender.
Add the broccolini and toss lightly over high heat to mix for a minute. Add the lemon juice and salt and toss lightly to mix. Stir together and taste for seasoning, adjusting if necessary. Scoop onto a platter or into a bowl and serve. Serve hot, at room temperature, or cold.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/6 of recipe100 calories5 grams of protein12 grams of carbohydrates4 grams of fiber240 milligrams of sodium5 grams of fat( 1 grams of saturated fat3 grams of monounsaturated fat1 grams of polyunsaturated fat)
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.