Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Iodine
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Iodine

Iodine is an essential trace mineral not made by the body so must be obtained by food or supplements. It is found naturally in some foods and is added to supplements and some salt seasonings. Iodine is needed to make the thyroid hormones thyroxine and triiodothyronine, which assist with the creation of proteins and enzyme activity, as well as regulating normal metabolism. Without enough iodine, these thyroid hormones do not work properly and can lead to an under-active or overactive thyroid gland, causing the medical conditions of hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism with various negative side effects in the body.

Recommended Amounts 

RDA: The Recommended Dietary Allowance for iodine is 150 micrograms (mcg) daily for adult men and women 19+ years, and 220 and 290 mcg daily for pregnant and lactating women, respectively. [1,2]

UL: A Tolerable Upper Intake Level (UL) is the maximum daily dose unlikely to cause adverse side effects in the general population. The UL for iodine for adults 19+ years and pregnant and lactating women is 1,100 mcg daily.

Iodine and Health
Infant and childhood health
Hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism
Food Sources

Iodine is found in soil and the ocean, which varies in amount and will affect how much of the mineral is contained in a food. Iodine is found mainly in animal protein foods and sea vegetables, and to a lesser extent in fortified foods like breads, cereals, and milk.

Seaweed (nori, kelp, kombu, wakame)
Fish, shellfish (cod, canned tuna, oysters, shrimp)
Table salts labeled “iodized”
Dairy (milk, cheese, yogurt)
Eggs
Beef liver
Chicken
Fortified infant formula
Signs of Deficiency and Toxicity
Deficiency

 Iodine regulates metabolism, the conversion of energy obtained from food into energy to help cells function and grow. A deficiency of iodine can therefore prevent normal growth and development. This is especially dangerous in pregnant women and infants, in which miscarriage, stillbirth, stunted growth, and cognitive impairments (difficulties with reading, writing, talking, problem solving, social skills) can occur. In adults, an iodine deficiency of less than 10-20 mcg a day can lead to inadequate thyroid hormone production, called hypothyroidism, which disrupts normal metabolic functions like regulating heart rate, body temperature, and body weight. [2] A lump or swelling in the neck, called goiter, often accompanies hypothyroidism. Other signs of hypothyroidism include:

Fatigue, lethargy
Weakness
Sensitivity to cold
Constipation
Dry skin and hair
Weight gain

People at risk for iodine deficiency include those who do not use iodized salt or supplements containing iodine, pregnant women, vegans who do not eat any animal foods, and those living in areas with low levels of iodine in the soil (e.g., mountainous regions). 

Toxicity

High iodine intakes are usually well-tolerated in most healthy people and do not cause problems. [1] This has been observed in countries such as Japan and Korea that eat iodine-rich seaweed regularly. [3] But some people with autoimmune thyroid disease or who have a history of chronic iodine deficiency can be sensitive to receiving extra iodine, inducing conditions of iodine deficiency like hypothyroidism and goiter. [2,4] Excess iodine can also lead to too much thyroid hormone production, causing hyperthyroidism; signs of this condition are an increased metabolism that promotes weight loss, fast or irregular heartbeat, hand tremors, irritability, fatigue, and sweatiness. Sometimes even just a slight increase in dietary iodine above the RDA can cause iodine-induced hyperthyroidism in sensitive individuals. [4]

Some epidemiologic studies have shown that high seaweed intakes are associated with an increased risk of certain types of thyroid cancer, particularly in postmenopausal women, but the exact mechanism is unclear. [2,3]

Excess iodine intake may come from use of high-dose supplements or overeating certain seaweeds and salts that contain iodine. Severe iodine poisoning is rare, but symptoms include fever; stomach pain; nausea; vomiting; a burning sensation of the mouth, throat, and stomach; and even coma. [2] Children, infants, the elderly, and those with existing thyroid disease are particularly vulnerable to iodine toxicity and iodine-induced hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism. [3,4]

Did You Know? 
In the U.S., people obtain most of their dietary iodine from iodized salt and milk.
Iodine supplements can interact with certain blood pressure medications and diuretics, including lisinopril, spironolactone, and amiloride, causing a dangerous buildup of potassium in the blood called hyperkalemia.
Iodine is an ingredient in contrast agents that a person may take before having an X-ray or computed tomography (CT scan). It helps to absorb the rays so that clearer pictures of the body’s organs can be seen.
Related

Vitamins and Minerals

References

Last reviewed March 2023

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.