Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
Learn more about the impacts of stress on eating patterns and health, and strategies that may help control it.
Mindful eating
Stemming from the broader practice of mindfulness, a look at this approach to eating and review of the available research behind it.
Plate and the Planet
Different foods have differing impacts on our health; they also have differing impacts on the environment. Learn about a “planetary health diet.”
Elevate your plate
Looking to reduce red meat for your health and the planet’s health? Find a strategy that works best for you.
Spotlight on artificial sweeteners
The health effects of low-calorie/artificial sweeteners are inconclusive, with research showing mixed findings. Learn more.
Sleep
Sleep is as essential to our daily needs as food and water, playing a critical role in brain as well as physical functioning.
1
2
3
4
5
6

The Healthy Eating Plate

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Carbohydrates

The type of carbohydrate you eat is more important than the amount.

Diet Reviews

A look at some popular diets—and the research behind them.

Food Features

Explore your favorite foods: History, nutrition, and cooking ideas.

Protein

Protein is essential macronutrient, but not all food sources are created equal.

Recipes

Healthy eating begins in the kitchen, whether at home or another venue.

The Nutrition Source Update

A monthly e-newsletter with practical strategies for healthy living.

Fats and Cholesterol

When it comes to dietary fat, what matters most is the type of fat you eat.

Disease Prevention

Type 2 diabetes and heart disease is striking people at younger ages – but prevention is in our power.

Kid's Healthy Eating Plate

A visual guide to encourage children to eat well and keep moving.

Salt and Sodium

We need some sodium but too much can lead to health problems.

Sustainability

Explore this multifaceted issue, in which food production and our diets play a major role.

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.