Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Avocados
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Avocados

Avocados or “alligator pears” are known for their creamy smooth flesh and bumpy skin. They are a popular food across many cultures. Perhaps best known as the star ingredient in guacamole, they are versatile and prepared in an array of dishes, or simply eaten plain with a spoon. Although not sweet, avocados are botanically classified as a fruit with a large berry and single center pit, grown from the Persea americana tree. They are believed to have originated in Mexico or Central America, with Mexico being the leading producer worldwide. [1]

Their nutrition profile makes them a staple in various healthful meal plans. Avocados are a good source of fiber, and contain more fat (the good kind) than carbohydrate, so are popular on lower-carbohydrate diets such as with diabetes. Their heart-friendly fats do not increase blood cholesterol, which can provide satisfaction on a traditional cholesterol-lowering diet that is often low in fat and cholesterol. It is one the highest-fat plant foods, making it a popular inclusion in vegan and vegetarian diets. The slightly earthy but neutral flavor of avocados works well in sauces, salad dressings, sandwiches, baked goods, salads, and grain dishes to add richness.

Source Of
Fat (mostly monounsaturated 67%)
Fiber (mostly insoluble but also soluble)
B vitamins
Vitamin C
Vitamin E
Vitamin K
Folate
Potassium
Magnesium
Carotenoids (lutein, zeaxanthin)

A whole medium avocado contains about 240 calories, 13 grams carbohydrate, 3 grams protein, 22 grams fat (15 grams monounsaturated, 4 grams polyunsaturated, 3 grams saturated), 10 grams fiber, and 11 milligrams sodium. Along with their low sodium levels, avocados contain no cholesterol.

Avocados and Health

Avocados contain several nutrients including carotenoids, monounsaturated fats, potassium, and fiber that have been associated with a reduced risk of chronic diseases, especially when included as part of a balanced nutritious diet. The nutritional profile of avocados fits well with healthful dietary patterns such as the Mediterranean and DASH diets. Published health research on avocados is largely funded by avocado industry groups; the research cited below attempts to include non-industry-funded studies. 

Cardiovascular disease
Type 2 diabetes
Eye health
Microbiome
Purchase

Depending on the variety, avocados may be round or pear-shaped, green or black, and small or large. The skin is typically bumpy. The flesh when ripe is smooth and buttery. They are a climacteric fruit, which continues to ripen after harvesting. The Hass avocado is the most common type, available year-round.

If you are planning to use an avocado immediately after purchase, choose a ripe one with dark green or almost black skin. It should yield to pressure when squeezed. Avocados with light green skin that are very firm are unripe and will need to sit a few days before eating. If the avocado has dark shriveled skin, dents, or spots of mushy flesh, it may be overripe and unpleasant to eat.

Avocado oil is extracted from the flesh of pressed avocados. It can replace other liquid cooking oils and has a very high smoke point of almost 500°F. Avocado oil is often compared with olive oil because they are both rich in the fatty acid, oleic acid, but avocado oil has a more neutral flavor. [7] It can also be used to make a homemade salad dressing: whisk or blend together ¼ cup avocado oil, 2 tablespoons Dijon mustard, and 4 teaspoons balsamic or apple cider vinegar; add additional low-sodium spices like black pepper or garlic powder as desired.

Storage

Avocados are often sold with hard, unripe flesh, which will ripen in 2-3 days. You can leave the fruit at room temperature, or place in direct sunlight to speed ripening. You can also place the avocado sealed in a paper bag with a banana; the ethylene gases in the banana will speed ripening. When ripe, avocados will feel slightly soft when squeezed. The flesh of avocados is infamous for quickly turning brown once exposed to air, called enzymatic browning. Although unappetizing to see, the brown flesh is perfectly edible. Still, there are tips to slow or reduce browning after cutting into an avocado:

Cover the flesh with lemon or lime juice.
Wrap tightly with plastic wrap or place in a sealed airtight container and store in the refrigerator to reduce oxygen exposure.
Store an avocado half with some sliced onion in a sealed airtight container; the sulfur compounds in the onion help preserve the avocado.
Prepare

Removing an avocado pit isn’t as challenging as you might think. Although a popular method is to stab a knife into the pit of an avocado half and cleanly remove it, this carries the potential danger of stabbing your hand! Instead, place your index and middle finger on the flesh on each side of the pit, placing your thumb behind the avocado on the skin; push into the center with your thumb until the pit pops out. From there, slice, dice, or mash the flesh as desired to be used in recipes.

The monounsaturated fat in avocados is stable in high heat and can be used not only in cooking but also in baking. Pureed avocado can be substituted for butter or oil in baking recipes, using a 1:1 ratio (1 cup butter = 1 cup avocado).

Serve

Here are some ideas to use avocado:

Diced and sprinkled into salads, soups, tacos, or whole grains
Blended into smoothies to thicken and add richness
Mashed as a spread on sandwiches and crackers
Mashed onto whole grain breakfast toast, sprinkled with blueberries and ground flaxseeds or hemp seeds
Sliced and rolled into maki sushi
Cut in half, drizzled with a squeeze of lemon or lime juice, and eaten with a spoon as a snack
Did You Know? 
One serving of a medium avocado (half the fruit) has more potassium than a medium banana, 487 mg potassium versus 422 mg potassium, respectively.
A ripe mashed avocado is sometimes used as a facial mask due its high content of hydrating oils and vitamin E.
References

Last reviewed April 2022

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.