Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Citrus Salad with Ginger Lime Dressing
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Citrus Salad with Ginger Lime Dressing

This is a very light, refreshing, beautiful salad that can be served as a side dish or dessert. The dressing for this salad also works well on salads made with mild flavored baby greens, like baby spinach.

Citrus Salad with Ginger Lime Dressing
Recipe courtesy of Amy Myrdal Miller
Serves 4
Ingredients:

For dressing
Juice from 1 lemon (about 3 tablespoons)
2 tablespoons canola oil
1 teaspoon finely grated fresh ginger root, peeled before grating
2 tablespoons granulated sugar
Zest from 1 lime (about 1 teaspoon very finely grated peel)
1/8 teaspoon salt
For salad
3 Cara Cara oranges, cut into segments
2 navel oranges, cut into segments
1 pink grapefruit, cut into segments
¼ cup chopped mint leaves
Preparation:

Combine all ingredients for the dressing in a small mixing bowl and whisk well.
To make beautiful Cara Cara segments, use a sharp knife to cut the top (stem side) and bottom off the fruit. Set the fruit on its bottom and use your knife to cut away the rest of the peel, working from the top to bottom and rotating the fruit as you go until all of the peel has been removed. You want to remove all of the white pith as well. Cut out the segments, leaving behind the membrane that separates the segments. Place the segments in a medium mixing bowl.
Drain off any juice from the segments, and then add the mint and dressing. Use a spoon to mix gently. Serve immediately.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/4 of recipe175 calories2 grams of protein30 grams of carbohydrates4 grams of fiber75 milligrams of sodium325 milligrams of potassium5 milligrams of cholesterol

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.