Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Farro Risotto with Walnut Pesto
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Farro Risotto with Walnut Pesto

A properly executed risotto can be a real treat for the senses: Tender-but-toothsome, al dente grains laden with an aromatic, creamy sauce that comes from the natural starches released by rice. Traditional risotto requires carnaroli or arborio rice, but there are plenty of other grains you can use. Farro is the perfect example. It’s easy to cook, but doesn’t turn mushy as easily as traditional rice varieties. Here we pair whole, unhulled farro with our earthy Walnut Pesto. Cracking about half the farro in a blender is key to releasing enough starch from the grains to create a creamy, risotto-like texture. To keep the grains separate, we add liquid in stages. Stirring in the pesto at the very end of cooking ensures maximum freshness and maintains a vibrant green color in the dish.

Farro Risotto with Walnut Pesto
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves 4
Ingredients:

1 cup whole farro
4 cups vegetable broth
2 cups water
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 onion, minced
Salt and pepper
2 garlic cloves, minced
1 cup dry white wine
1 recipe Walnut Pesto
⅓ cup basil leaves, torn into ½-inch pieces
Preparation:

Pulse farro in blender until about half of grains are broken into smaller pieces, about 6 pulses.
Bring broth and water to boil in large saucepan over high heat; reduce heat to low and cover.
Meanwhile, heat oil in large heavy-bottomed pot over medium heat until shimmering. Add onion and 1/2 teaspoon salt and cook, stirring occasionally, until softened, 3 to 4 minutes. Stir in garlic and cook until fragrant, about 30 seconds. 
Stir in farro, increase the heat to medium, and cook, stirring often, until lightly toasted, about 4 minutes. Stir in the wine and continue to cook, stirring often, until the wine has been completely absorbed, about 2 minutes. 
Stir in 2 cups broth mixture and simmer, stirring occasionally, until the liquid is absorbed and the bottom of the pan is dry, 15 to 20 minutes. Stir in 2 more cups of the warm broth and continue to simmer, stirring occasionally, until the liquid is absorbed and the bottom of the pan is dry, 15 to 20 ­minutes longer.
Continue to cook risotto, stirring often and adding 1/2 cup remaining broth at a time as needed to keep pan bottom from becoming dry (about every 4 minutes), until grains are cooked through but still have bite, 15 to 20 minutes longer. Off heat, stir in 1/2 cup pesto. Season with salt and pepper to taste. Serve with remaining 1/2 cup pesto and basil.

 

Nutrition facts:
1 serving325 calories4 grams of protein4 grams of carbohydrates1 grams of fiber195 milligrams of sodium167 milligrams of potassium35 grams of fat( 5 grams of saturated fat21 grams of monounsaturated fat7 grams of polyunsaturated fat) 5 milligrams of cholesterol
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.