Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Crunchy Roasted Chickpeas
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Crunchy Roasted Chickpeas

Oven-roasting chickpeas give them a satisfyingly crispy texture. Add your own favorite blend of spices and toss some chickpeas in a salad, or grab a handful for a healthy snack.

Ingredients
One 15-oz can chickpeas (garbanzo beans)
1 Tablespoon olive oil
1 teaspoon spice or spice blend of choice (more/less to taste)
Try dried spices like chili powder, cumin, curry powder, cayenne, cinnamon, or fresh herbs such as thyme, rosemary, oregano.
Instructions
Preheat oven to 400 degrees F.
Strain the chickpeas and rinse well, draining as much water as possible. Lay the chickpeas on a paper towel or dish cloth, and pat dry to absorb the water. For crispier chickpeas, roll the towel over the beans to remove the thin skins (this step is optional but it will further eliminate moisture when baking).
Once fully dry, line a baking sheet and place the chickpeas in the oven to roast for 15 minutes (avoid crowding the baking sheet, especially if doubling the recipe).
Remove chickpeas from the oven and drizzle with olive oil and sprinkle over the spices, making sure they are evenly coated. Place them back into the oven and roast for another 15 minutes (you may need more or less time, just keep an eye on them so they don’t burn).
When done, turn off the oven and keep its door slightly open as it cools down. Note that the chickpeas will be crunchiest following roasting, but can be stored for a few days at room temperature.

HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.