Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Olive Oil Dressing (Stuffing) with Chicken & Walnuts
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Olive Oil Dressing (Stuffing) with Chicken & Walnuts

We show how to use meat as a “condiment” in this recipe, which also includes olive oil – no butter – and whole wheat bread. Walnuts, rich in omega-3 fatty acids, give the dish a subtle, nutty flavor and delightful texture.

Ingredients (Serves 8)
1 medium-large yellow onion
2 large stalks celery
1 clove garlic
1/2 lb. Italian chicken sausage (can be omitted for vegetarian option)
6-8 sprigs fresh sage
1 sprig rosemary
2 sprigs thyme
2 teaspoons dried sage
2 teaspoons cracked black pepper
extra virgin olive oil
1 loaf whole wheat bread
1-2 cups homemade very low-sodium vegetable stock
1/2-3/4 cup dried cranberries
3/4 cup walnuts, halves and pieces
Instructions
Cut the onion and celery into a small dice (1/4”). Mince the garlic. Mince the leaves of the sage, rosemary, and thyme. The fresh and dried sage is essential – the other herbs are not. Cut the bread into 3/4” cubes and set aside. If using, take the casings off of the sausage.
Heat an oven to 350 degrees Fahrenheit. Arrange the walnut pieces on a baking sheet, and toast for 5-6 minutes until lightly browned.
Heat 2 Tablespoons of olive oil in a large sauté pan or dutch oven over medium heat. If using, put the chicken sausage in the pan, and break up into small pieces as it cooks. Cook the sausage for 8-12 minutes, stirring frequently and scraping the bottom of the pan, until the sausage is browned. Add the onion, celery, garlic, another tablespoon of olive oil. Turn the heat to medium-low and sweat the veggies for 6-8 minutes until translucent.
Add the minced herbs, dried sage, and black pepper, and stir frequently for 30 seconds. Add the bread cubes and another 1-2 tablespoons of olive oil. Cook the bread cubes, stirring constantly, for 5-6 minutes until everything is evenly mixed. Start to add the stock, a little at a time, scraping the bottom of the pan as you do so. Add stock until the bread is nicely moist, but not mushy. When the right consistency is achieved, add the walnuts and cranberries.
Heat an oven to 400 degrees Fahrenheit. Pour the stuffing into a 9×11 baking dish, and bake for 15-25 minutes, checking frequently, until the top is lightly toasted.

More recipes to Prioritize Plants for Healthy Holiday Cooking

Nutrition information per serving (1/8 of recipe):

With chicken sausage:
395 calories, 19 g protein, 53 g carbohydrate, 8 g fiber, 17 g sugar (includes 0 g added sugar), 551 mg sodium, 56 mg potassium, 13 g fat (2 g sat, 4 g mono, 7 g poly, 0 g trans), 28 mg cholesterol

Without chicken sausage:
354 calories, 12 g protein, 53 g carbohydrate, 8 g fiber, 17 g sugar (includes 0 g added sugar), 337 mg sodium, 56 mg potassium, 11 g fat (1 g sat, 2 g mono, 7 g poly, 0 g trans), 0 mg cholesterol

HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.