Skip to main content

Support Harvard Chan School

Help us build a world where everyone can thrive. Make a gift

Close alert
Search
Giving
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
Degrees & Programs
Admissions
Faculty & Research
Open Primary Navigation
Our research
saves lives.

Now, more than ever, we’re focused on our mission: Building a world where everyone can thrive.

Who We Are
Our research
saves lives.

Now, more than ever, we’re focused on our mission: Building a world where everyone can thrive.

Who We Are
Our research
saves lives.

Now, more than ever, we’re focused on our mission: Building a world where everyone can thrive.

Who We Are
 Pause animation

Quick Links

Research Impact
Areas of Focus
Support our Mission
Discover
Learn
Engage
Research with real-world impact

Our faculty and students work together to improve health, prevent disease, and support well-being.

Research Centers and Labs
Meet our community of changemakers
Student Katie Crum aims to improve drug safety for patients with heart failure
Maitreyi Mazumdar’s research spurs action to prevent spina bifida in newborns
Student Kenny Mendoza digs into the risks of ultra-processed foods and seeks solutions
A student experience to match your goals.
Truly global community

Join a powerful network of 16,000+ alumni, including global leaders in health policy, practice, and advocacy at the highest levels.

Programs on campus, online, and in the field

Choose from 35 degree programs and over 150 executive education classes to fit your schedule. Apply your learning in the field with hands-on research and practicum opportunities in dozens of countries.

Accessible faculty and dedicated mentors

Learn from world-class scientists and practitioners, including nearly 500 faculty and more than 100 research scientists. Find mentors who will support you, challenge you, and open doors for you in every field of study.

Recent News
Read
More News
Yunge Xiao, SM ’25, gained confidence as a researcher at Harvard Chan School
Health Policy
May 21, 2025
Caring for the caregivers
Health Policy
May 15, 2025
An aspiring astronaut’s mission—improve mental health in older adults
Mental Health
May 15, 2025
Unleash your potential at Harvard Chan School.

In addition to our degree programs, we offer highly targeted executive and continuing education, directed and taught by Harvard faculty.

Degree Programs
How to Apply
Executive and Continuing Education
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
Administrative Offices
Public Health Resources
Jobs
my.harvard
Intranet
Make a Gift
Contact
Report Issue / Leave Feedback
Accessibility
Digital Accessibility
Privacy Statement
Nondiscrimination Policy
Report Copyright Infringement
Report Security Issue
Trademark Notice
Public health insights in your inbox.

Stay connected with newsletters on climate, nutrition, communication — and the latest from Harvard Chan School.

Subscribe
677 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115
© 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
youtube
linkedin
instagram
tiktok
threads