Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Food Features
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Food Features

Did you know that references to yogurt and health date all the way back to 6000 BCE? Or that before its dramatic rise in popularity, kale was more often used as a garnish?

What makes food so enjoyable—beyond the flavors, textures, and variety it brings to everyday life—is that each one has some unique story behind it; from where it was first cultivated, to how it’s been used and adapted for changing tastes and preferences from one decade to the next. Of course, there’s also the relationship between food and health, though we know it’s more important to focus on an overall healthy eating pattern, rather than a few magic-bullet “superfoods.”

Indeed, these food features aren’t about promoting any individual foods, but an opportunity to explore a bit of the history and research behind them, along with some practical tips for when you’re shopping and cooking. Take a look!

Almonds
Although native to the Mediterranean region, 80% of the world’s almond supply is now grown in California. Learn more about this popular tree nut.
Apples
Does eating an apple every day really keep the doctor away? Learn about apples and health, and the best types for cooking versus munching.
Aquatic Foods
Explore about the wide variety of animals, plants, and microorganisms originating in bodies of water, including finfish, crustaceans, cephalopods, mollusks, seaweed, and more.
Avocados
Avocados or “alligator pears” are known for their creamy smooth flesh and bumpy skin. Learn more about this popular food found throughout many cultures.
Bananas
Some people consider this iconic golden fruit a healthy choice while others avoid it, after seeing it on Internet lists of “Worst Foods.” Clearing up confusion surrounding bananas.
Brussels Sprouts
Learn all about Brussels sprouts—their history, nutrient profile, as well as tips on how to prepare and cook them.
Cheese
Countries around the world have experimented with cheese-making, varying the types of milk, how long the cheese is allowed to age and ripen, and using different additives like salt or acid to produce unique textures and flavors.
Chia Seeds
Ch-ch-ch-chia! These versatile seeds come from the plant Salvia hispanica L., and are a complete plant-based protein.
Chickpeas (Garbanzo Beans)
Whether you call them chickpeas or garbanzo beans, learn more about these versatile legumes which are a staple of diets worldwide.
Coconut Oil
Coconut oil is made by pressing fresh coconut meat or dried coconut meat called copra. An overview of the research and culinary uses for this tropical oil.
Coffee
Coffee lovers around the world who reach for their morning brew probably aren’t thinking about its health benefits or risks. And yet this beverage has been subject to a long history of debate.
Dark Chocolate
Learn all about dark chocolate—from its Mayan origins in 2000 BCE, to the potential heart health benefits from its flavanol-rich cocoa solids.
Eggs
“Are eggs healthy?” is a frequently-asked nutrition question. Get an overview on eggs and health, along with some purchasing and preparation tips.
Kale
Who knew a vegetable could be so cool? Learn more about the history and research behind this popular leafy green, as well as recipes and cooking tips.
Lentils
Lentils are one of the earliest domesticated crops, seen in the diets of ancient Rome and Egypt. Learn more about this staple legume.
Milk
Research on milk and health often produces contrary findings. Some reasons may be the wide range of different nutritional qualities in milk and how milk intake is measured. Learn more about this popular beverage.
Mushrooms
There are thousands of varieties of mushrooms, with different colors, shapes, sizes, and tastes. Learn more about these umami-packed fungi.
Oats
Oats are available in a variety of forms, based on their processing. Learn about the different types, oats and health, and how to cook with them.
Quinoa
Often eaten like a whole grain, quinoa is actually an edible seed and a complete protein. Learn more about this unique pseudo-grain.
Rice
Did you know there are over 40,000 varieties of rice? Learn more about this global staple grain.
Seaweed
Seaweed may bring to mind the slippery plants that curl around your toes when walking in the ocean, while less recognized as an aquatic food on your dinner plate. But “seaweed” (the common name for countless species of marine plants and algae) has been consumed globally for centuries.
Sweet Potatoes
True to their name, sweet potatoes have a naturally sweet flavor, which is further enhanced through cooking methods like roasting.
Tea
Tea is the simple preparation of pouring hot water over cured leaves of the Camellia sinensis plant. The flavor of tea varies by where the tea leaves are harvested and how they are grown and processed. Learn more about this popular global beverage.
Vinegar
Not many foods play the role of both a prized cooking ingredient and household cleaner. Check out this feature on vinegar in its many varieties.
Water
There are many options for what to drink, but water is the best choice for most people who have access to safe drinking water. It is calorie-free and as easy to find as the nearest tap. Learn more about water and health, and fun flavoring ideas to help you hydrate.
Winter Squash
Along with being uniquely beautiful in a variety of colors and shapes, the firm flesh of winter squash is ideal for soups and other warming dishes.
Yogurt
Did you know that references to yogurt and health date back to 6000 BCE? Learn about the history and current research surrounding this fermented food.

Check back often as new food features are regularly added. 

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.