Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Chloride
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Chloride

Chloride is a mineral naturally found in various foods, but our main dietary source is sodium chloride, otherwise known as table salt. Chloride carries an electric charge and therefore is classified as an electrolyte, along with sodium and potassium. It helps to regulate the amount of fluid and types of nutrients going in and out of the cells. It also maintains proper pH levels, stimulates stomach acid needed for digestion, stimulates the action of nerve and muscle cells, and facilitates the flow of oxygen and carbon dioxide within cells. [1] Chloride is absorbed in the small intestine and remains in the body’s fluids and blood. Any excess amount is excreted in urine. Chloride is usually bound to sodium, and therefore the amount in blood tends to coincide with sodium levels.

Recommended Amounts

AI: Adequate intakes are used when there is insufficient evidence to develop a recommended dietary allowance (RDA), and is established at an amount that ensures nutritional adequacy. The AI for chloride for people ages 14-50 and women pregnant or lactating is 2.3 grams daily, for ages 51-70 is 2 grams daily, and for ages 71+ is 1.8 grams daily. [2]

Chloride and Health

Research is not available on the association of chloride with specific diseases or health conditions. [1]

Food Sources

Chloride is naturally found in small amounts in meat and seafood, but the main sources in the Western diet are sodium chloride, or table salt, and as an additive and preservative in processed foods.

Table salt, sea salt, Kosher salt
Seaweed
Shrimp
High-sodium processed foods including deli meats, hot dogs, cheese, and potato chips
High-sodium condiments including soy sauce, Worcestershire sauce, ketchup
Signs of Deficiency and Toxicity
Deficiency

A chloride deficiency is extremely rare in the U.S. where the average diet is high in sodium. Most foods that contain sodium will also provide chloride. [2] A loss of chloride in the body usually accompanies conditions that cause sodium losses. These include conditions that remove too much fluid from the body, such as prolonged diarrhea, vomiting, or excessive sweating. Diuretic medications that remove fluid through the kidneys can also cause decreased chloride levels. In cases of sudden, very high levels of blood glucose such as seen in people with diabetes, the kidneys will flush more sodium and water out of the body, leading to lower chloride levels. [2]

Toxicity

Toxicity from the diet is rare in healthy people. Excess chloride levels in the blood, called hyperchloremia, can be caused by severe dehydration, diarrhea, or metabolic problems in which the blood becomes too acidic, such as with kidney disease. A high salt diet can lead to an excessive intake of sodium chloride, which is associated with elevated blood pressure.

Symptoms of toxicity:

Muscle weakness
High blood pressure
Fatigue
Related

Vitamins and Minerals

References

Last reviewed March 2023

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.