Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Strategies to reduce red meat and elevate your plate > Swap out red meat for healthier meats
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Swap out red meat for healthier meats
Elevate your plate: Reducing red meat in our diets can be a win for our own health and the health of the planet. If you’re not quite sure where to start, these strategies can help you cut-back the red meat while keeping your meals filling and flavorful.

People have varying perceptions of what they consider to be “meat.” Although technically defined as any animal flesh consumed for food, some may only think of red and processed animal products as “meats,” while poultry and fish are viewed as separate categories. This may be a helpful approach, since the variety of meats and other animal products can have different effects on our own health, and the health of the planet.

Start here:

While a key goal should be getting more veggies and other quality plant-based foods in your diet, this step towards reducing red meat is pretty straightforward: incorporate a reasonable amount of poultry (like chicken and turkey) and a variety of seafood (from fish to mollusks).

If you were planning to make a dish with red meat in a “starring role,” consider poultry and fish in its place. Finding some new favorite recipes is a great start; but here are some simple swaps that will come in handy for a range of recipes:
Marinate and pan-fry chicken or fish instead of grilling burgers and ribs
Swap in ground turkey for ground beef
Think sliced fresh chicken or canned tuna over cold cuts of any kind
Bake/sauté a chicken breast or some white fish, instead of frying a steak
Roast a turkey, chicken, or salmon rather than beef, lamb, or ham
You may be familiar with a classic beef-stuffed bell pepper, but have you ever tried other versions of this easily customizable dish? This stuffed pepper recipe ventures into new flavor territory with a stuffing of spicy chicken, black beans, and a mixture of veggies.
GET THE RECIPE.
Take it a step further:

This strategy comes in handy when you’re designing a meal around animal-based protein, but what about giving plant-based foods some more of the spotlight? This next strategy boosts healthy plant-based foods like beans, nuts, whole grains, and other veggies, while still providing enough protein and ways to incorporate some of your favorite animal-based foods:

Consume less meat, enjoy more variety
SEE THE TIPS.
More plate upgrades:
Prioritize hearty and savory plant-based preparations
Simple strategies for creating filling, delicious, and even budget-friendly plant-based dishes.
Eat a little less red meat, any way you can
Assess how often you eat red meat, and see if one of these strategies can help you find a way to cut back a bit.

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.