Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Vegetarian Shepherd’s Pie
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Vegetarian Shepherd’s Pie

This dish makes a beautiful centerpiece, with its top layer of bright, orange sweet potatoes. The filling of chickpeas and vegetables gives the pie a nice “bite,” making this recipe a top contender for any holiday gathering.

Ingredients (Serves 8)
1/2 lb. chickpeas, dried
2 bay leaves
(or, substitute 2  14.5oz cans of low-sodium chickpeas, drained and rinsed)
1 lb. turnips
1 10-oz. container cremini or button mushrooms
2-3 medium carrots
1 large or 2 medium leeks
2 large stalks of celery
2 medium cloves garlic
3-4 sprigs sage
2 sprigs rosemary
4-6 sprigs thyme
2 teaspoons cracked black pepper
2 teaspoons tomato paste
1/4 cup whole wheat flour
2-4 cups homemade very low-sodium vegetable stock
5 lbs. sweet potatoes
4 egg yolks
4 Tablespoons olive oil
kosher salt, to taste
1 teaspoon black pepper
Instructions


For the chickpeas (omit these steps if using canned chickpeas)

Soak chickpeas overnight in enough lightly salted water to cover them by 4”. If you don’t have the time, put the chickpeas in a pot, cover with lightly salted water (also about 4”), bring to a boil, then turn off the heat and let them sit for about 2 hours.
Once the chickpeas have soaked, combine the chickpeas, soaking liquid, and the bay leaves in a soup pot, bring to a boil over high heat, then reduce the heat to low and simmer for a little over an hour, or until the chickpeas are tender but still retain a bit of texture. Strain the chickpeas and set them aside.

For the carrots, turnips, and mushrooms

Wash everything, and cut into evenly-sized 1/2” pieces. Heat an oven to 425 degrees Fahrenheit. Combine vegetables, and divide into batches so the baking sheet isn’t overcrowded.
Toss each batch in olive oil, and place on baking sheet. Roast each batch in the oven until browned and cooked through – this can take anywhere from 10-20 minutes. Set the roasted veggies aside when finished.

To complete the filling


Cut the root off of the leek(s) and remove the dark green leaves, keeping only the very light-green and white parts. Take off the outer layer. Cut the leek(s) into a small dice (about 1/4” pieces). Soak the leek pieces in a bowl of water for 5 minutes, then lift them out (don’t pour them out) and place them in a colander to drain. Cut the celery into a small dice, and mince the garlic. Mince the herbs.
Heat 2 Tablespoons olive oil in a 2 quart pot over medium-low heat, and add the leeks, celery, and garlic. Sweat the veggies for 5-8 minutes until translucent – keep the heat low so they don’t color. Add the herbs, black pepper, and tomato paste, and cook for 3-4 minutes, stirring constantly so the tomato paste doesn’t stick and burn.
Add 4 Tablespoons olive oil to the pot, and then the whole wheat flour. Stir the flour and continue to cook for 4-5 minutes, stirring constantly. Slowly add the vegetable stock while stirring, starting with about 2 cups. Turn the heat up to medium-high and bring to a simmer, then add more stock if necessary to bring the sauce to a thick stew-like consistency. Remove from the heat.
Mix together the chickpeas, mushrooms, turnips, carrots, and filling ‘base’. You may not need all of the filling base – add a little at a time until you get to the desired consistency. It should be rich and fairly thick – not soupy. If needed, season to taste with kosher salt.
Heat oven to 350 degrees Fahrenheit. Wrap each yam/sweet potato in aluminum foil, place on a baking sheet, and roast in the oven until completely soft, 50 minutes. Remove from the oven and allow to cool.
Scoop out all of the flesh from the sweet potatoes/yams and put in a mixing bowl with the olive oil and black pepper. Mash with a big fork or potato masher. Whip the egg yolks with a little kosher salt until smooth, and add to the bowl. Mix until everything is combined.

To assemble and serve

Heat an oven to 350 degrees Fahrenheit. Spread the filling in the bottom of a 9×11” casserole dish. Spread the mashed sweet potatoes/yams evenly on top. Bake in the oven for 30 minutes, or until the top is lightly browned.

More recipes to Prioritize Plants for Healthy Holiday Cooking

Nutrition information per serving (1/8 of recipe):
488 calories, 15 g protein, 87 g carbohydrate, 11 g fiber, 17 g sugar (includes 0 g added sugar), 226 mg sodium, 1279 mg potassium, 11 g fat (2 g sat, 6 g mono, 3 g poly, 0 g trans), 92 mg cholesterol

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.