Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Curried Red Lentil Soup
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Curried Red Lentil Soup

Red lentils are a versatile member of the lentil family. Along with yellow and white lentil varieties, red lentils are sold decorticated (with their skins removed), so they cook much quicker than do their black, brown, or green counterparts. In fact, red lentils easily cook down to mush if you’re not careful, but that’s a great quality to have when making soups or Indian-style daal. Here we have a hearty soup with some of those Indian influences—just shy of a more authentic masoor dal—using a few key pantry items. Blooming spices and tomato paste in an onion mixture creates layers of toasty flavor. And because these lentils cook and soften so quickly, there’s no need for a blender or any special equipment. Instead, we simply use a whisk to lightly pulse the mixture, resulting in a soup with a pleasant, rustic texture. A splash of lemon juice gives brightness to the dish. Add a little naan or toasted bread, and salad, and you’ve got a quick, simple soup makes the perfect light dinner.

Curried Red Lentil Soup
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves 4-6
Ingredients:

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil, plus extra for serving
1 large onion, chopped fine
Pinch salt
2 teaspoons curry powder
½ teaspoon ground cumin
¼ teaspoon pepper
Pinch cayenne
1 tablespoon tomato paste
1 garlic clove, minced
4 cups chicken broth
2 cups water
10 ½ ounces (1 ½ cups) red lentils, picked over and rinsed
2 tablespoons lemon juice, plus extra wedges for serving
Chopped fresh cilantro
Preparation:

Heat oil in large saucepan over medium heat. Add onion and 1 teaspoon salt and cook, stirring occasionally, until softened, about 5 minutes. Add curry powder, cumin, pepper, and cayenne, and cook until fragrant, about 2 minutes. Stir in tomato paste and garlic and cook for 1 minute. Stir in broth, water, and lentils and bring to simmer. Simmer, stirring occasionally, until lentils are soft and about half are broken down, about 15 minutes.
Whisk soup vigorously until it is coarsely pureed, about 30 seconds. Stir in lemon juice and season with salt to taste. Ladle soup into individual bowls, drizzle each portion with olive oil, sprinkle with cilantro, and serve with extra lemon juice. (Soup can be refrigerated for up to 3 days. Thin soup with water, if desired, when reheating.)
Nutrition facts:
1 serving (out of 5 servings)333 calories21 grams of protein49 grams of carbohydrates19 grams of fiber5 grams of sugar744 milligrams of sodium379 milligrams of potassium7 grams of fat( 1 grams of saturated fat4 grams of monounsaturated fat1 grams of polyunsaturated fat)
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.