Skip to main content
Search
Giving
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
Degrees & Programs
Admissions
Faculty & Research
Open Primary Navigation
Home / Alumni and Friends / Support Harvard Chan School

Alumni and Friends

Give Now
More ways to give
Home
For our Graduates
Giving
Support Harvard Chan School
Ways to Give
Invest in Students
Get Involved
Impact
Events
Contact Us
Support Harvard Chan School

Meet the moment with us.

Now, more than ever, Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health needs philanthropy to support our mission: improving health and advancing equity so all people can thrive.

Play

Our alumni and friends provide critical resources to educate the next generation of public health leaders; empower faculty to pursue groundbreaking research; and translate those insights into real-world solutions to global health challenges.

Your support provides the security and flexibility we need to maintain our standard of excellence and respond swiftly to emerging opportunities.

Together, we can create a healthier, more equitable world. 

Your support matters now, more than ever.

With Harvard’s federal funding frozen, we are relying on philanthropy to power our research and support our educational programs. Every gift to the Annual Fund, regardless of size, advances our vision of health, dignity, and justice for all.

Give Now Online
More Ways to give
Annual Giving

Gifts to the Annual Fund and Scholarship Fund provide vital resources that propel our mission and shape the future of public health.

Unrestricted Support: Powering Innovation

When you give unrestricted support to the Annual Fund, you provide flexible resources that:

Support world-class faculty conducting breakthrough research
Maintain cutting-edge facilities and research infrastructure
Enable strategic investments in emerging opportunities
Sustain excellence across all our core activities
The Scholarship Fund: Investing in Future Leaders

Your gift to the Scholarship Fund helps attract and support exceptional students who will transform public health:

60% of our students rely on financial aid
Students from 75 countries bring diverse perspectives to critical health challenges
Additional support helps reduce debt burden, enabling graduates to pursue impactful careers
Competitive aid packages help us attract top talent—84% who decline admission cite funding as the key factor
Learn more about why financial aid matters
Additional Areas for Impact
Student Support

Launch the next generation of public health leaders

Faculty Support

Advance public health on a global scale

Research Support

Drive solutions to global challenges

Planned Giving

Make provisions for future gifts to Harvard Chan School.

Create a Legacy
Your Giving Drives Public Health Progress
Students help bolster mental health, epilepsy care at Ugandan clinic
New malaria control strategy efficiently kills parasites in the mosquito, could lead to more effective bed nets
Yunge Xiao, SM ’25, gained confidence as a researcher at Harvard Chan School
Office of Development and Alumni Relations
giving@hsph.harvard.edu
alumni@hsph.harvard.edu
Find a staff member
Privacy statement
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
Administrative Offices
Public Health Resources
Jobs
my.harvard
Intranet
Make a Gift
Contact
Report Issue / Leave Feedback
Accessibility
Digital Accessibility
Privacy Statement
Nondiscrimination Policy
Report Copyright Infringement
Report Security Issue
Trademark Notice
Public health insights in your inbox.

Stay connected with newsletters on climate, nutrition, communication — and the latest from Harvard Chan School.

Subscribe
677 Huntington Avenue, Boston, MA 02115
© 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
youtube
linkedin
instagram
tiktok
threads