Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Strategies to reduce red meat and elevate your plate > Eat a little less red meat, any way you can
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Eat a little less red meat, any way you can
Elevate your plate: Reducing red meat in our diets can be a win for our own health and the health of the planet. If you’re not quite sure where to start, these strategies can help you cut-back the red meat while keeping your meals filling and flavorful.

It may seem obvious, but one of the first steps you can take in reducing your consumption of red meat is to simply eat a little less of it!

Start here:

This approach can be a range of steps on its own. Figure out what works for you, and keep moving forward. “Less” can be a variety of strategies. For example:

Focus on eating at least one type less:
For your health, perhaps start with reducing the processed meats in your diet like bacon, sausages, and cold cuts (note that with processed meats it’s not just red meat that may be a problem, but any processed meat, like turkey bacon or lunch meat, and chicken sausage).
Then move onto the red meat you consume most often, like beef, pork, and lamb. For your health and the health of the planet, try focusing on reducing your consumption of lamb and beef especially. Beef is one of the most impactful animal foods to produce. In the U.S. alone, beef accounts for 36% of all food-related greenhouse gas emissions—a key contributor to climate change.
If you eat red meat multiple times a day—for example, breakfast sausages, a ham sandwich for lunch, and steak at dinner—try cutting down your consumption to once a day.
If you eat red meat once a day, see if you’re able to reduce the portion size a bit. A single instead of a double hamburger? A few fewer slices of bacon? Or, if a recipe calls for a pound of beef, maybe you can buy just half and adjust a few other ingredients?
If you’ve ever had ground beef in a pasta sauce, you’ve already experienced this concept. Alongside the sautéed veggies and simmered tomatoes, ground beef provides some flavor and texture—but at a quantity much less than if you were serving whole meatballs over the pasta; or if you cut out the pasta altogether and served a slice of meatloaf with tomato sauce.
With this strategy, there’s no change in flavor, but it can be an upgrade for your health. For example:
You’re probably familiar with a stuffed pepper, which is typically filled with a large portion of ground beef, rice, and tomatoes. With just a few simple tweaks, we created a healthier version with no change in flavor.
GET THE RECIPE
From there, how about eating red meat fewer times per week? Or only eating it on the weekends? Once a week? Once every other week? A few times each month? Only when you’re dining out?
You could also try saving red meat only for special occasions, like a holiday, birthday, or an event. For example, think about eating beef as a splurge, rather than an everyday option—the way many of us think about lobster.
Take it a step further:

It’s important to remember when you’re cutting out red meat to replace it with healthy options—not refined grains or highly-processed foods. For example, if you’re thinking of a meal with red meat as the star, see if you can replace it with a better option, like poultry or seafood:

Swap out red meat for healthier meats
SEE THE TIPS.
More plate upgrades:
Consume less meat, enjoy more variety
This approach boosts healthy plant-based foods like beans, nuts, whole grains, and other veggies, while still providing ways to incorporate some of your favorite animal-based foods.
Prioritize hearty and savory plant-based preparations
Simple strategies for creating filling, delicious, and even budget-friendly plant-based dishes.

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.