Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Three-Green & Wheat Berry Salad with Mushroom “Bacon”
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Three-Green & Wheat Berry Salad with Mushroom “Bacon”

Skip processed meats and try our mushroom “bacon,” used here in combination with three different types of greens and wheat berries. This tasty salad is sure to go fast, so you may even want to double the recipe!

Ingredients (Serves 8)
1 large bunch rainbow chard (or Swiss chard)
1 large bunch kale (any kind)
1 lb. Brussels sprouts
1/2 lb. shiitake mushrooms
1 Tablespoon maple syrup
1 teaspoon chipotle powder or smoked paprika
1 teaspoon cracked black pepper
1 bay leaf
1/2 cup dried wheat berries
2 oz. fresh goat cheese (if desired)
extra virgin olive oil
1 large shallot
1 teaspoon Dijon mustard
a few grinds of cracked black pepper
1/8 teaspoon of kosher salt
2 Tablespoons raw honey
1/4 cup sherry vinegar (or cider vinegar)
3/4 cup extra virgin olive oil
Instructions
Wash the kale and chard thoroughly. If either is too tough to eat raw, wilt slightly in a pan with a little olive oil. Dry the leaves well. Tear the leaves into bite-sized pieces and set aside.
Quarter the Brussels sprouts, removing any tough outer leaves. Heat 3 Tablespoons olive oil in a large saute pan over high heat. Right before the oil is about to smoke, add the Brussels sprouts to the pan in an even layer. If you can’t add them all in one layer, do them in batches. Sear the Brussels sprouts, flipping around occasionally, until dark brown and roasted. Add more olive oil if needed. Remove from heat and set aside to cool.
Heat 1 Tablespoon olive oil in a small soup pan over medium heat. Wash the wheat berries and drain off the excess water. Add the wheat berries to the pan, and toast them in the oil, stirring frequently, for about 5 minutes. Add a pinch of kosher salt, the bay leaf, and cover with about 2” of water. Turn the heat to high and bring to a boil, then reduce the heat to low and simmer them until tender, 30-40 minutes. They should begin to pop open a bit. When you taste one, it shouldn’t feel hard, but it should still have a good bite to it. When the wheat berries are done, strain and set aside to cool.

For the mushroom “bacon”



Heat an oven to 400 degrees Fahrenheit. Trim the stems off of the shiitake mushrooms. Toss the caps in olive oil and kosher salt, and spread on a piece of parchment paper on a baking sheet.
Bake for 8-10 minutes until they start to get brown and roasted. Remove from the oven and allow to cool slightly. Mix the maple syrup, chipotle powder/paprika, and black pepper, and toss the mushrooms in the mixture until evenly coated. Return the mushrooms to the oven for 2-3 minutes until they start to crisp up again, then remove and set aside to cool on the baking sheet.


For the dressing

Cut the shallot into a small dice (1/4”). Heat 1 Tablespoon olive oil in a small saute pan over medium-low heat. Add the shallot to the pan and cook, stirring frequently, until the shallot is golden brown and caramelized, about 12-15 minutes.
Add the shallot, mustard, black pepper, salt, honey, and vinegar to the blender, or to a cup just big enough around to fit a hand blender. Blend until fully combined. While the blender is running, slowly add the 3/4 cup of oil in a thin stream until fully incorporated. Add water if needed to thin out the dressing.

To finish

Add the goat cheese (if desired), Brussels sprouts, mushrooms, wheat berries, and about 2-4 Tablespoons dressing to a large mixing bowl. It’s better to start with less dressing and add more later. Add the greens and toss the ingredients together until everything is coated with dressing and mixed well. Add extra dressing as needed.

More recipes to Prioritize Plants for Healthy Holiday Cooking

Nutrition information per serving (1/8 of recipe):
298 calories, 6 g protein, 21 g carbohydrate, 5 g fiber, 10 g sugar (includes 1.5 g added sugar), 102 mg sodium, 516 mg potassium, 23 g fat (4 g sat, 16 g mono, 3 g poly, 0 g trans),  3 mg cholesterol

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.