Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Thai Eggplant Salad with Coconut Tofu Strips
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Thai Eggplant Salad with Coconut Tofu Strips
Thai Eggplant Salad with Coconut Tofu Strips
Recipe courtesy of Mollie Katzen/Harvard University Dining Services
Cook Time 30 min.
Serves 4
Ingredients:

Oil or nonstick spray for the roasting tray
1½ pounds eggplant, peeled only if necessary, and cut into 1½ inch cubes
Salt to taste
¼ pound Persian cucumber (or another tasty, sweet variety), peeled only if necessary, and cut into small dice
1 small, sweet bell pepper (orange or purple are especially nice), diced
Cherry tomatoes (optional), cut in half if large
Red pepper flakes to taste
Touch of lime zest (optional)
Coconut-lime vinaigrette (see recipe below)
Coconut tofu strips (see recipe below)

For coconut-lime vinaigrette

½ to 1 teaspoon minced or crushed garlic
3 tablespoons fresh lime juice
3 tablespoons reduced fat coconut milk
½ teaspoon salt
1½ teaspoons agave nectar or sugar
5 tablespoons vegetable oil (grapeseed oil or olive oil are good choices)
For coconut tofu strips
1 tablespoon vegetable oil
8 ounces very firm tofu, cut into strips
Dash or two of salt (optional)
4 tablespoons shredded unsweetened coconut
1 to 2 teaspoons sugar (optional)
Preparation:

Preheat oven to 400 degrees Fahrenheit. Line a roasting or baking tray with foil, and slick very lightly with oil or add a light coating of nonstick spray.
Spread out the eggplant cubes in a single layer, and roast until very tender (about 20 to 30 minutes, depending on their size).
Meanwhile, spread out ¼ cup of the vinaigrette in a shallow dish.
When the eggplant is done, salt it lightly, and transfer to the dish, swishing it gently into the vinaigrette. Toss lightly, adding another 2 tablespoons of the vinaigrette as you go.
When it cools to room temperature, add the cucumber, bell pepper, cherry tomatoes (if using), and some red pepper flakes to taste. (You can also add some grated lime zest for more zing.)
Let it sit to marinate for at least another 10 minutes, and as long as a day, covered and refrigerated.
Serve at room temperature or cooled, topped with coconut tofu strips.

For coconut-lime vinaigrette

Combine the garlic, lime juice, coconut milk, salt, and sweetener in a bowl or jar with a lid. Whisk until combined, and then keep whisking as you drizzle in the oil to form an emulsion. When all the oil is incorporated set aside. If you are making this well in advance, cover and refrigerate, then bring to room temperature before using.

For coconut tofu strips

Place a medium-sized skillet over medium heat and wait 1 minute. Add the oil, and swirl to coat the pan.
Toss in the tofu strips with a dash or two of salt, and stir-fry (or “toss-fry”) until heated through and beginning to get crispy. Sprinkle in the coconut, and if you like it a touch sweet, some sugar, and continue to cook and toss until the coconut is lightly golden and heavily aromatic.
Serve at any temperature, sprinkled on your favorite rice or vegetable dish with compatible flavors.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/4 of recipe350 calories8 grams of protein18 grams of carbohydrates8 grams of fiber460 milligrams of sodium27 grams of fat( 7 grams of saturated fat18 grams of monounsaturated fat2 grams of polyunsaturated fat)
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.