Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Cauliflower Tomato Soup with Indian Spices
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Cauliflower Tomato Soup with Indian Spices

This soup gets its thick, silky, almost creamy consistency from pureed cauliflower instead of cream, and it gets its intense flavor from a variety of traditional Indian spices. It is good served either warm or cold. You can garnish with cilantro leaves and a dollop of plain yogurt to add vibrant color and even more fantastic flavor.  Serve with your favorite sandwich and some fresh fruit. The soup can be stored in the refrigerator for up to five days. It can also be frozen and reheated.

Cauliflower Tomato Soup with Indian Spices
Recipe courtesy of Amy Myrdal Miller
Cook Time 30 - 40 min.
Serves 6
Ingredients:

2 tablespoons canola oil
1 teaspoon coriander seeds
1 teaspoon mustard seeds
1 teaspoon ground turmeric
½ teaspoon cumin seeds
½ teaspoon red pepper flakes
½ teaspoon ground coriander
1 medium white or yellow onion, chopped
1 28-ounce can crushed tomatoes
1 pound fresh or frozen cauliflower, cut into florets
4 cups water
¼ teaspoon kosher salt
½ teaspoon freshly ground black pepper
½ cup plain, low-fat yogurt, for garnish
½ cup cilantro leaves, for garnish
Preparation:

In a 4-quart stock pot combine the canola oil, coriander seeds, mustard seeds, turmeric, cumin seeds, red pepper flakes, and ground coriander. Turn heat to medium and gently warm the spices until you can hear the mustard seeds begin to pop and you begin to smell the heady aroma of the other spices.
Add the onions, reduce the heat to medium-low and cook until the onions are soft, about 5 to 6 minutes.
Add the crushed tomatoes, cauliflower, and water. Increase the heat to high, bring to a boil, and then reduce heat to low, cover, and cook until the cauliflower is soft, about 20 to 25 minutes.
Remove from heat and use an immersion blender to create a smooth, “creamy” soup. Season with kosher salt and black pepper.
Garnish, if desired, with cilantro and yogurt, and serve.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/6 of recipe130 calories8 grams of protein19 grams of carbohydrates5 grams of fiber310 milligrams of sodium745 milligrams of potassium

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.