Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Portabella Sandwiches with Umami Sauce
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Portabella Sandwiches with Umami Sauce

Umami is the Japanese term for deliciousness. The umami flavor in certain foods comes from glutamic acid, an amino acid associated with savory or meaty flavors. Mushrooms contain a significant amount of glutamic acid and are considered an umami-rich food. Other umami-rich foods include tomatoes, aged cheeses like Parmeggiano Reggiano, and fermented foods like fish sauce and soy sauce. This recipe aggregates a number of umami-rich foods to create a savory, meat-free sandwich.

Portabella Sandwiches with Umami Sauce
Recipe courtesy of The Culinary Institute of America
Serves 4
Ingredients:

For umami sauce
¼ cup mayonnaise
1 ½ teaspoons reduced sodium or “lite” soy sauce
½ teaspoon Dijon-style mustard
For caramelized onions
1 medium white or yellow onion, sliced
1 tablespoon extra virgin olive oil
½ teaspoon dried thyme
For portabella mushrooms
4 large portabella mushroom caps, stems removed
1 tablespoon extra virgin olive oil
3 teaspoons reduced sodium or “lite” soy sauce
3 teaspoons balsamic vinegar
4 whole grain rolls, toasted or warmed on the grill
Preparation:

Preheat your grill to medium-high.
In a small bowl combine the mayonnaise, soy sauce, and mustard. Set aside
In a medium sauté pan over medium-high heat combine the onions and olive oil. Cook for 10 to 12 minutes, or until onions are brown and have developed caramelized flavor. Add the thyme, cook for additional 30 seconds, remove from heat, and set aside
Brush the portabella mushroom caps with olive oil on both sides. Grill 3 to 4 minutes per side, or until tender.
Assemble your sandwiches by placing a mushroom cap on the bottom of each bun. Top the mushroom with about ¼ cup caramelized onions and 1 tablespoon of the umami sauce. Place the top bun on each sandwich and serve.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/4 of recipe280 calories6 grams of protein24 grams of carbohydrates4 grams of fiber450 milligrams of sodium450 milligrams of potassium18 grams of fat( 3 grams of saturated fat8 grams of monounsaturated fat7 grams of polyunsaturated fat) 5 milligrams of cholesterol
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.