Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Sprouted Lentil, Cabbage, and Celery Slaw
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Sprouted Lentil, Cabbage, and Celery Slaw

Here’s an easy, crunch-filled salad that highlights the crisp texture and grassy flavor of sprouted lentils (see the recipe to make them at home). To keep the salad crisp and refreshing, we salt cabbage for an hour to drain off extra moisture that would otherwise water down the dish. For an intense, savory but bright dressing, we pair toasted sesame oil and fresh lime juice. A dash of fish sauce brings a subtle funk and richness. We even add sliced celery, doubling down on the crunch factor. This slaw is perfect paired with a piece of fish or chicken, or enjoyed on its own for a light lunch.

Sprouted Lentil, Cabbage, and Celery Slaw
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves 6
Ingredients:

1 small head green cabbage, cored and chopped fine
2 teaspoons salt
1 cup sprouted lentils
2 ribs celery, sliced thin
2 scallions, sliced thin
½ cup chopped fresh cilantro
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
3 tablespoons toasted sesame oil
¼ cup lime juice (about 2 limes)
1 tablespoon fish sauce
1 tablespoon toasted sesame seeds, plus extra for serving
½ teaspoon ground cumin
Preparation:

Toss cabbage and salt in colander set over medium bowl. Let stand until wilted, about 45 minutes. Rinse cabbage under cold water, drain, dry well with paper towels, and transfer to large bowl. Add sprouted lentils, celery, scallions, and cilantro to bowl.
Whisk olive oil, sesame oil, lime juice, fish sauce, sesame seeds, and cumin in small bowl until smooth and combined, about 30 seconds. Pour dressing over cabbage mixture and toss to coat. Divide slaw into bowls and garnish with extra sesame seeds. Serve.
Nutrition facts:
1 serving192 calories4 grams of protein16 grams of carbohydrates5 grams of fiber7 grams of sugar473 milligrams of sodium547 milligrams of potassium15 grams of fat( 2 grams of saturated fat8 grams of monounsaturated fat4 grams of polyunsaturated fat)

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.