Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Healthy Weight > Healthy Dietary Styles
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Healthy Dietary Styles
While current research comparing diets of differing macronutrient ratios may not point to one “perfect” diet, there is compelling research about certain dietary styles, including the Mediterranean diet, that offers strong guidance.
Curious about “quick fixes” like diet pills and gastric bypass surgery? Check out our tips for how to reach a winning weight.
Low-Fat Fails

While low-fat was once the diet du jour, subsequent research has shown that low-fat diets are ineffective, and moreover, that eating healthy fats is beneficial for health.

In the United States, obesity has become increasingly common even as the percentage of fat in the American diet has declined from 45 percent in the 1960s to about 33 percent in the late 1990s. So, cutting fat is not shrinking waistlines. (27, 28)
Experimental studies lasting one year or longer have not shown a link between dietary fat and weight. (29, 30)
In the eight-year Women’s Health Initiative Dietary Modification Trial, women assigned to a low-fat diet didn’t lose or gain more weight than women eating their usual fare. (31)
Low-Carbohydrate and Mediterranean Diets Can Be Effective

While many “diets” are fads meant to be followed for short periods of time, research shows that some approaches, including some low-carbohydrate diets and Mediterranean diets can be good models upon which to base your own dietary strategy as long as they incorporate healthy, high-quality foods.

One study comparing a low-carbohydrate, low-fat, and Mediterranean diet followed over 300 people for a 2-year period and found that diets composed of different foods can lead to different weight loss outcomes.  Published in the New England Journal of Medicine, this study concluded that:

Mediterranean and low-carbohydrate diets might be more effective than low-fat diets.
The positive effects of the low-carbohydrate diet and the Mediterranean diet upon lipids and glycemic control suggest that individualized dietary interventions – which take personal preferences and metabolic considerations into account – could be effective. (32)

A large randomized trial on the effects of a Mediterranean diet on cardiovascular disease showed that among patients at high risk for CVD, a Mediterranean diet supplemented with extra-virgin olive oil or nuts reduced the incidence of major cardiovascular events over  4.8-years of follow-up. (33)

This was the first randomized trial that showed reduced cardiac events over a long follow-up period, so it provided strong scientific evidence that the Mediterranean diet is a heart-healthy dietary approach.
Though this study focused on cardiovascular outcomes rather than weight loss, it still provides solid evidence that “a calorie is a calorie” is not the case, and that instead, food quality is a key contributor to personal health.
It also shows that low-fat diets are continuing to lose credibility, and that incorporating healthy fats – such as those included in the Mediterranean diet –  can improve heart health and weight loss.
What Exactly is a “Mediterranean” Diet?

There isn’t one exact Mediterranean diet, as this eating style takes into account the different foods, eating patterns, and lifestyles in multiple countries that border the Mediterranean Sea. However, there are similarities that define a Mediterranean eating pattern.

Conclusion:  The best diet incorporates high-quality foods in appropriate portions; there isn’t one “perfect” diet for everyone.

Calories matter, but quality is equally important. When making dietary decisions, regardless of whether you choose a certain dietary style such as low-carbohydrate or Mediterranean, you can also use the Healthy Eating Plate as a guide for how to fill your plate.

A healthy diet for weight loss also needs to be sustainable, and regardless of what you’re eating, you need to make sure you’re not eating too many calories overall. Calories do matter, but focus first on choosing high-quality, healthy foods.

References


27. Is total fat consumption really decreasing, U.C.f.N.P.a. Promotion, Editor. 1998.
28. Diet and Health: Food Consumption and Nutrient Intake, U.D.o.A. Economic Research Service, Editor. 1977–1996.
29.  Willett, W.C., Dietary fat plays a major role in obesity: no. Obes Rev, 2002. 3(2): p. 59-68.
30. Willett, W.C. and R.L. Leibel, Dietary fat is not a major determinant of body fat. Am J Med, 2002. 113 Suppl 9B: p. 47S-59S.
31. Howard, B.V., et al., Low-fat dietary pattern and weight change over 7 years: the Women’s Health Initiative Dietary Modification Trial. JAMA, 2006. 295(1): p. 39-49.
32. Shai, I., et al., Weight loss with a low-carbohydrate, Mediterranean, or low-fat diet. N Engl J Med, 2008. 359(3): p. 229-41.
33. Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvadó J, et al., Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease with a mediterranean diet supplemented with extra-virgin olive oil or nuts. New England Journal of Medicine. 2018 Jun 13. [Note: reference updated in June 2018 due to retraction and republication]

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.