Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Fantastic Bulgur Dish
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Fantastic Bulgur Dish

Be sure to use a heavy nonstick pan. Plain kitchen scissors are the best utensil for cutting dried tomatoes. Tiny yellow cherry tomatoes look and work best in this dish. If you can only get larger ones, cut them in half. If you can only get red ones, that will be okay, too. Chopped Roma tomatoes will work as well.

Fantastic Bulgur Dish
Recipe courtesy of Mollie Katzen/Harvard University Dining Services
Cook Time 50 min.
Serves 6
Ingredients:

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil
2 cups tiny cherry tomatoes (½ pound)—yellow ones, if available, or diced Roma tomatoes
½ cup dried tomatoes, minced (1 ounce)
1 tablespoon minced garlic
¾ teaspoon salt
1½ cups coarse bulgur
2 cups water (room temperature or warmer)
¼ teaspoon red pepper flakes to taste
1 to 2 tablespoons fresh lemon juice to taste
2 to 3 teaspoons light-colored honey to taste
Freshly ground black pepper
1 cup chopped walnuts, lightly toasted
Roasted walnut oil
Wedges of lemon
Preparation:

Heat 1 tablespoon olive oil in a large, deep nonstick skillet. Add the cherry tomatoes and sauté over high heat for about 5 minutes.
Stir in the dried tomatoes and the salt. Continue cooking over high heat for about 2 to 3 minutes longer (cherry tomatoes might begin to pop open from the heat, and that’s fine).
Turn the heat down. Add the garlic and bulgur (and a little more oil, if it seems dry), and sauté over medium-low heat for about 2 minutes. Stir in the water, bring to a boil, then turn the heat down as low as possible. Cover and simmer for 35 minutes or until the bulgur is tender.
Transfer to a serving bowl, and fluff with a fork to let the steam escape so that the bulgur won’t become mushy. Taste to adjust salt, then add red pepper flakes, lemon juice, honey, and black pepper to taste.
Serve hot or warm, topped with walnuts and a drizzle of roasted walnut oil, and garnish with lemon wedges.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/6 of recipe340 calories9 grams of protein46 grams of carbohydrates6 grams of fiber300 milligrams of sodium15 grams of fat
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.