Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Garlic-Braised Greens
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Garlic-Braised Greens

Here’s your chance to experience those intriguing “braising greens” often found next to the bulk salad mix and spinach in better produce departments and farmers’ markets! Often these mixes contain miniature specimens of a greater assortment of leaves than you might otherwise purchase by the bunch (or at all). Often found in these mixes: dandelion greens, baby red mustard, tat soi, tiny kale, diminutive beet greens, and so on. Make sure they are perky and not at all wilted, and cook them that same evening, or at the very least, the next. They lose their spark if they sit around.

Roasted garlic has a handsomely bitter flavor that is both deeper and milder than fresh garlic. Roasted and fresh team up really well together to embrace an assortment of greens.

Remember to roast the garlic as much as several days ahead of time. Store it in a sealed plastic bag in the refrigerator until use.  Furthermore, make this in two batches so the pan won’t be crowded. Contact with the hot pan is key.

Garlic-Braised Greens
Recipe courtesy of Mollie Katzen/Harvard University Dining Services
Serves 4
Ingredients:

2 medium-sized bulbs garlic (tip sliced off near the top)
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
8 to 10 cups or about a pound (packed) braising greens
Salt to taste
½ to 1 teaspoon minced or crushed garlic
Preparation:

Preheat the oven to 375 degrees Fahrenheit. Line a small baking tray with foil and brush lightly with olive oil.
Stand the garlic bulbs root side-down on the prepared tray, and drizzle the open top surfaces (where you sliced off the tops) with a little olive oil. Roast in the center of the oven for 35 to 40 minutes, or until they feel soft when gently squeezed. Remove the tray from the oven, and let the bulbs cool until comfortable to handle. Separate the cloves, and squeeze each one over a small bowl, releasing the pulp. (Some cloves might keep their shape, while others turn to mush. All forms are welcome!)
You can also peel all the garlic while it is still uncooked, and wrap the cloves in a tight little foil packet, spooning in about a teaspoon of olive oil. Roast the packet for about 20 to 30 minutes at 325 degrees Fahrenheit or until the cloves are very soft.
Stem the greens, if necessary. Leave them whole, if very small, or coarsely chop if medium-small. Your call.
Place a large, deep skillet over medium heat. After about a minute, add half the remaining olive oil, and swirl to coat the pan. Toss in half of the greens, turn the heat up to medium-high, and stir-fry, turning with tongs, for about 5 minutes, or until wilted. Stir in half the fresh garlic, sprinkle lightly with salt, if desired, then transfer to a medium-sized bowl, and set aside. Repeat this step with the remaining olive oil and greens.
When the leaves have wilted and the fresh garlic is mixed in, reduce the heat to medium-low, and return the first batch of greens to the pan. Add the roasted garlic, turning everything together with tongs to combine. Add a little extra olive oil, if desired, and taste to adjust salt. Serve hot, warm, or at room temperature.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/4 of recipe130 calories3 grams of protein9 grams of carbohydrates3 grams of fiber85 milligrams of sodium

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.