Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Pasta In Zemino with Seafood, Chickpeas, and Greens
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Pasta In Zemino with Seafood, Chickpeas, and Greens
Pasta In Zemino with Seafood, Chickpeas, and Greens
Recipe courtesy of Joyce Goldstein and The Culinary Institute of America
Cook Time 30 min.
Serves 6
Ingredients:

2 pounds greens (chard, beet greens, escarole, or spinach), or 12 large handfuls
1½ pounds shellfish (scallops, prawns, squid, or clams), cleaned
If you are using scallops: Remove the muscles from each one.
If you are using prawns: Remove the shells and devein if necessary.
If you are using squid: Clean and cut into rings about ½ inch wide, keeping the tentacles in one piece unless they are large in which case you may cut them in half.
If you are using clams: Allow 16 tiny clams in the shell per person, or about 8 to 10 out of the shell if they are larger.
½-¾ cup extra virgin olive oil
1 medium onion, chopped
12 garlic cloves, minced
2 teaspoons hot pepper flakes
2 cups tomatoes diced in ½ inch cubes or canned diced tomatoes or tomato sauce
½ cup dry white wine
1½ cups chickpeas, cooked (optional)
1 pound whole grain pasta, cooked al dente
Preparation:

Cut greens into ½-inch by 3-inch strips, then wash and drain.
Boil the greens in a large quantity of salted water to soften them, about 5 minutes. Drain well, refresh with cold water to set the color, and drain again. Chop coarsely and set aside.
In a large sauté pan, add ½ cup of olive oil and sauté the onion until tender, about 8 minutes. Add the garlic and hot pepper flakes and cook for a minute. Then add the chopped tomatoes or sauce if using, the optional chickpeas with some of their liquid, and the greens. Heat through. This should be a bit soupy.
Season the shellfish with salt and pepper. You may steam them very briefly in the white wine and add the shellfish and wine to the greens. Alternately, you may add the wine along with the tomatoes and cook the shellfish directly in the pan with the greens until the shrimp turn pink, the scallops become opaque, and the squid turns white. The squid will cook in a matter of minutes. Taste the sauce and then season with salt and pepper. Toss with the cooked pasta. Serve at once.
Nutrition facts:
Per 1/6 of recipe695 calories43 grams of protein84 grams of carbohydrates14 grams of fiber425 milligrams of sodium175 milligrams of cholesterol

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.