Skip to content
Search Toggle
The Nutrition Source
Healthy Eating Plate Nutrition News About Make a Gift
The Nutrition Source > Crispy Pan Seared White Fish with Walnut Romesco and Pea Shoot Salad
THE NUTRITION SOURCE
Search for:
 
Home
Nutrition News
What Should I Eat?
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate & Pyramid
expand child menu
Healthy Eating Plate Translations
Kid’s Healthy Eating Plate
Whole Grains
Protein
Vegetables and Fruits
Fats and Cholesterol
expand child menu
Types of Fat
Cholesterol
Dietary Fat and Disease
Vitamins and Minerals
Healthy Drinks
expand child menu
Water
Other Healthy Beverage Options
Drinks to Consume in Moderation
Sugary Drinks
expand child menu
Sports Drinks
Energy Drinks
Public Health Concerns: Sugary Drinks
Low-Calorie Sweeteners
Salt and Sodium
expand child menu
Take Action: How to Reduce Your Intake
Public Health Concerns
Carbohydrates
expand child menu
Carbohydrates and Blood Sugar
Fiber
Added Sugar
Sustainability
expand child menu
Plate and the Planet
Food Waste
Healthy Weight
expand child menu
Body Fat
The Best Diet: Quality Counts
Healthy Dietary Styles
Diet Reviews
Staying Active
expand child menu
Active Communities
Stress
Sleep
Healthy Longevity
Disease Prevention
expand child menu
Obesity
expand child menu
Preventing Obesity
Heart Disease
expand child menu
Prevention
Diabetes
expand child menu
Prevention
Cancer
expand child menu
Prevention
Oral Health
Precision Nutrition
Nutrition and Immunity
Healthy Food Environment
expand child menu
Healthy Child Care Settings 
Healthy Schools
Healthy Spaces for Youth 
Healthy Workplaces
Healthy Health Care
Recipes
expand child menu
Food Service Resources
Food Features
About
FAQ
Contact
Crispy Pan Seared White Fish with Walnut Romesco and Pea Shoot Salad

Romesco is a classic sauce from Catalonia, Spain that was originally made to eat with fish. Typically, the sauce consists of roasted tomatoes, garlic, almonds, oil, and some type of pepper. For our version, a handful of toasted walnuts provides a subtle sweetness, richness, and slightly thickens the sauce to a creamy consistency. In place of roasted tomatoes, we use jarred roasted red peppers, hitting all of those sweet, umami, savory notes. A splash of sherry vinegar brightens the sauce, providing enough acidity to complement a piece of fish or meat. Here we serve our romesco with a simple, crispy-skinned piece of fish and a bright, herbaceous salad on top. Any firm-fleshed, white fish works well here: We recommend striped bass, black bass, halibut, and snapper. If you prefer a sauce with a little less acidic punch, you may substitute red wine vinegar for sherry vinegar in Step 2. And if you’re having trouble finding pea shoots, arugula, watercress, or any other light leafy green will do just fine.

Crispy Pan Seared White Fish with Walnut Romesco and Pea Shoot Salad
Recipe courtesy of Tim Chin
Serves 4
Ingredients:

Fish
4 (4- to 6-ounce) skin-on white fish fillets, 1 to 1½ inches thick
Kosher salt

2 tablespoons vegetable oil

Sauce

1 (12-ounce) jar roasted red peppers, drained (8.5 oz dry weight)
1 tablespoon sherry vinegar
1 clove garlic
1 teaspoon smoked paprika
½ teaspoon cayenne pepper
2 teaspoons kosher salt
¼ cup extra-virgin olive oil

½ cup (2 ounces) toasted walnuts

Salad

1 small shallot, minced
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
2 teaspoons lemon juice
½ teaspoon kosher salt
¼ teaspoon pepper
2 cups pea shoots, cut into 2-inch pieces
½ cup (2 ounces) toasted walnuts, chopped coarsely
2 tablespoons mint leaves, torn into 1/2-inch pieces
Preparation:

For the Fish: Using sharp knife score skin lengthwise at ½-inch intervals, making ¼-inch-deep cuts, stopping ½ inch from top and bottom of filet. Season both sides of filets evenly with 2 teaspoons salt and place skin side up on wire rack set in rimmed baking sheet. Refrigerate for at least 45 minutes or up to 1½ hours.
For the Sauce: Meanwhile, place peppers, vinegar, garlic, 2 teaspoons salt, smoked paprika, and cayenne in blender and blend on high speed until smooth, about 30 seconds. With blender running, slowly drizzle in oil until smooth and creamy, about 1 minute. Add walnuts and blend on high speed until smooth, about 1 minute longer. (For smoother sauce, strain sauce through fine-mesh strainer, pressing on solids to extract as much liquid as possible; discard solids.) Transfer sauce to bowl and season with salt to taste.  
For the Salad: Whisk shallot, oil, lemon juice, salt, and pepper in large bowl until combined. Add pea shoots, walnuts, and mint and toss gently to combine. Season with salt to taste and set aside until ready to use.
Remove fish from refrigerator and pat skin dry with paper towels. Heat oil in 12-inch nonstick skillet over high heat until just smoking. Carefully slide fillets, skin side down, into skillet. Immediately reduce heat to medium-low; using fish spatula, firmly press fillets down for 20 to 30 seconds to create good contact between skin and skillet. Continue to cook, tilting skillet occasionally to distribute oil, until skin is well browned and flesh is opaque except for top ¼ inch, 8 to 12 minutes. (If at any time during searing, oil starts to smoke or sides of fish start to brown, reduce heat so that oil is sizzling but not smoking.)
Turn off heat. Flip fish and continue cooking until fish registers 125 degrees F/52 degrees C, about 30 seconds longer. Immediately transfer fish to large platter or wire rack set in rimmed baking sheet. Spoon dollops of sauce onto individual plates. Place fillets, skin side up, on top of sauce and serve with salad.
Nutrition facts:
1 serving654 calories29 grams of protein12 grams of carbohydrates5 grams of fiber5 grams of sugar946 milligrams of sodium748 milligrams of potassium59 grams of fat( 31 grams of saturated fat18 grams of monounsaturated fat7 grams of polyunsaturated fat)
HEALTHY OILS
WATER
VEGETABLES
FRUITS
HEALTHY PROTEIN
WHOLE GRAINS

Create healthy, balanced meals using this visual guide as a blueprint.

Support The Nutrition Source

Thank you for supporting our mission of translating food and nutrition knowledge into daily practice!
MAKE A GIFT

 

Get Our Newsletter

A monthly update filled with nutrition news and tips from Harvard experts—all designed to help you eat healthier.
SIGN UP

Harvard Chan Home Harvard University Home Make a Gift Privacy Policy Report Copyright Violation Accessibility
Copyright © 2025 The President and Fellows of Harvard College
Terms of Use
The contents of this website are for educational purposes and are not intended to offer personal medical advice. You should seek the advice of your physician or other qualified health provider with any questions you may have regarding a medical condition. Never disregard professional medical advice or delay in seeking it because of something you have read on this website. The Nutrition Source does not recommend or endorse any products.